Environmental Management
Environmental Management introduces the principles, practice and key policy issues
of this important topic, providing a comprehensive introduction and resource for
students and practitioners alike.
It draws together the common themes which run through the various areas of
application, which include: the precautionary principle; the ‘polluter-pays’ principle;
a multidisciplinary and anticipatory approach; the goal of sustainable development;
assessment of risks, hazards and impacts; and environmental stewardship. C.J.Barrow
explores how environmental management may be pursued by individuals, companies,
governments, NGOs and international bodies.
Environmental management is a broad and rapidly evolving discipline, and
this book highlights the subject’s core themes and principles.
C.J.Barrow is Senior Lecturer in the School of Social Sciences and International
Development of the University of Wales Swansea.
Routledge Environmental Management Series
This important series presents a comprehensive introduction to the principles and
practices of environmental management across a wide range of fields. Introducing
the theories and practices fundamental to modern environmental management, the
series features a number of focused volumes to examine applications in specific
environments and topics, all offering a wealth of real-life examples and practical
guidance.
MANAGING ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUTION
Andrew Farmer
COASTAL AND ESTUARINE MANAGEMENT
Peter W.French
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT IN PRACTICE
D.Owen Harrop and J.Ashley Nixon
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
Principles and practice
C.J.Barrow
Forthcoming titles:
WETLAND MANAGEMENT
L.Heathwaite
COUNTRYSIDE MANAGEMENT
R.Clarke
Environmental Management
Principles and practice
C.J.Barrow
London and New York
First published 1999
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2002.
© 1999 C.J.Barrow
The right of C.J.Barrow to be identified as the Author of this Work has
been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and
Patents Act 1988
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means,
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording,
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Barrow, Christopher J.
Environmental management: principles and practice/C.J.Barrow.
p. cm. —(Routledge environmental management series)
1. Environmental management. I. Title. II. Series.
GE300.B375 1999 99–17744
363.7´05–dc21
ISBN 0-415-18560-2 (hbk)
ISBN 0-415-18561-0 (pbk)
ISBN 0-203-02618-7 Master e-book ISBN
ISBN 0-203-20542-1 (Glassbook Format)
Contents
List of figures and boxes vii
Preface x
1 Introduction 1
2 Environmental management fundamentals and goals 17
3 Environmental management—business and law 29
4 Standards, monitoring, modelling, eco-auditing and environmental
management systems 59
5 Environmental management and economics 75
6 Environmental risk management, impact, hazard and risk assessment 93
7 Environmental management and science 127
8 Environmental management, environmentalism and social science 151
9 Ecosystem management 169
10 Environmental management in sensitive, vulnerable and difficult
situations 187
11 Pollution and waste management 205
12 Participants in environmental management 235
v
CONTENTS
13 Environmental management approaches 249
14 The way ahead 261
References 273
Index 321
vi
Figures and boxes
Figures
1.1 A typical scheme of practice adopted for environmental management 6
2.1 Time horizon of the World3 model 23
2.2 Major decision-making steps in a typical environmental management
process 26
3.1 Corporate environmental management: the parties involved 32
3.2 Ecolabelling 39
3.3 The Antarctic: (a) territorial claims; (b) possible economic zones to
200 nautical miles, and limit of Antarctic Treaty 53
4.1 EMAS eco-audit award logo 67
4.2 Basic environmental management system approach 73
4.3 The basic provisions of the EU’s EMAS 73
5.1 The elements of total economic value 77
5.2 A classification of environmental resources 81
6.1 How impact assessment fits into planning 99
6.2 Relationship of EIA, technology assessment, social forecasting and
SIA 100
6.3 Relationships, exchanges of information and methodologies for EIAs,
environmental audits, systems of national accounts and
state-of-the-environment reports 100
6.4 A comparison of SEA and EIA 122
6.5 Stages in and links between policy-, plan- and programme-making
and SEA 123
7.1 Cape Disappointment, South Georgia 129
7.2 Natural system and social system relationship 130
vii
FIGURES AND BOXES
7.3 A glacier calving into the sea 134
7.4 Abrupt boundary between cleared lowland tropical rainforest and
young oil-palm plantation, Malaysia 141
9.1 The relations between ecosystem components 171
9.2 The conventional approach to studying ecosystems 173
9.3 Baltic Sea Joint Comprehensive Action Programme 181
10.1 Alpine resort of Cervinia, Italy 195
10.2 Overgrazed land, High Atlas Mountains, Morocco 196
10.3 Vegetation damage leading to soil degradation 198
11.1 Landfill refuse disposal site, Belgium 213
11.2 Sungai Besi tin mine south of Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 216
12.1 Tucuruí Dam, Amazonian Brazil, before completion 242
12.2 Links between major factors influencing environmental degradation 243
13.1 Linkages of levels in sustainable development tasks 257
14.1 What the world wants—and how to pay for it 268
14.2 Singapore 269
Boxes
1.1 Some definitions of environmental management 5
1.2 Some definitions of sustainable development 8
2.1 Approaches to environmental management 20
3.1 Business Charter for Sustainable Development 35
3.2 Forms of regulation or legislation 43
3.3 Agreements made at the Earth Summit, 1992 50
3.4 A selection of treaties, agreements, etc., relating to environmental
management 52
4.1 Types of eco-audit 68
4.2 Eco-audit-environmental management system standards 70
5.1 Curitiba City, Brazil 78
5.2 The positive and negative effects of free trade on environmental
management 90
5.3 Clash between free trade and environmental management 92
6.1 An overview of EIA 96
6.2 Typical step-wise EIA process 97
6.3 The 1969 US National Environmental Policy Act 102
7.1 Ecological concepts and parameters which are useful for
environmental management 139
8.1 Common property resource 156
8.2 Some common green characteristics 158
8.3 Concepts dealing with human-environment relations 163
8.4 Broad groupings of greens 164
9.1 Advantages and disadvantages of the ecosystem approach 177
9.2 How the ecosystem approach can advise the environmental manager 178
viii
FIGURES AND BOXES
11.1 The polluter-pays principle, NIMBY and NIABY 209
12.1 Participants in environmental management 237
12.2 Why the public should be involved in environmental management 245
ix
Preface
This book explores the nature, scope and role of environmental management. It offers
a foundation for a series of texts which deal with the application of environmental
management, including:
♦ Environmental Risk Management
♦ Managing Environmental Pollution
♦ Coastal and Estuarine Management
♦ Countryside Management
♦ Environmental Assessment in Practice
Environmental management is a broad and rapidly evolving discipline. This
book explores the subject’s core themes and principles, which include:
♦ a multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary or holistic approach;
♦ support for the ‘polluter-pays’ principle;
♦ a goal of sustainable development;
♦ concern for limits, hazards and potential;
♦ an attempt to act beyond the local or project level;
♦ support for long-term not just short-term planning;
♦ adherence to the ‘precautionary principle’;
♦ translation of theory to effective practice;
♦ the integration of environmental science, planning and management, policy
making and public involvement;
♦ an awareness of the need to change the ethics of peoples, businesses and
governments.
The practical issues and challenges faced during the environmental management
process are introduced.
CJB 4 October 1998
Chapter 1
Introduction
♦ The evolution of environmental management 2
♦ The definition and scope of environmental
management 3
♦ Problems and opportunities 7
♦ Criticism of environmental management 11
♦ The establishment of environmental
management 12
♦ Recommended reading and resources 14
1
The evolution of environmental management
From prehistory humankind have accumulated environmental know-how and
developed strategies for exploiting nature. To help regulate resource use people
evolved taboos, superstitions and common rights, formulated laws to improve
stewardship, and even undertook national resource inventories (such as the twelfth-
century AD Domesday survey). While some managed to sustain reasonable lifestyles
for long periods, the idea that pre-modern people ‘close to nature’ caused little
environmental damage is largely an arcadian myth. Indeed, with populations a fraction
of today’s, prehistoric people, using fire and weapons of flint, bone, wood and leather,
managed to alter the vegetation of most continents and probably to wipe out many
species of large mammals (Tudge, 1995).
Developments apparent in the late twentieth century make it critical that
environmental management be got right; these include: global pollution; loss of
biodiversity; soil degradation; and urban growth. The challenges are great, but there
have been advances in understanding the structure and function of the environment,
in monitoring impacts, data handling and analysis, modelling, assessment, and
planning. It is the role of environmental management to co-ordinate and focus such
developments, to improve human well-being, and mitigate or prevent further damage
to the Earth and its organisms.
Technological optimism apparent in the west, particularly from the 1830s
onward, and expressed in natural resources management, faltered a little after 1945
as awareness of environmental problems grew (Mitchell, 1997). Limited efforts were
made to ensure natural resources exploitation was integrated with social and economic
development before the 1970s—e.g. integrated or comprehensive regional planning
and management had been undertaken as early as the 1930s with the establishment
of river basin bodies (Barrow, 1997). Urban and regional planning also have some
roots in holistic, ecosystem approaches (things which have more recently attracted
those interested in environmental management) (Slocombe, 1993:290). However,
natural resources management (in contrast with environmental management) is more
concerned with specific components of the Earth—resources—which have utility
and can be exploited, mainly for short-term gain and the benefit of special-interest
groups, companies or governments. Also, natural resources management responses
to problems tend to be reactive, and often rely on quick-fix technological means and
a project-by-project approach. Natural resources managers have often been drawn
from a limited range of disciplines, typically with little sociological and limited
environmental expertise. Their management can be authoritarian and may fail to
involve the public; they also tend to miss off-site and delayed impacts. Because of
these failings natural resources management has lost ground to environmental
management in the last 40 years or so.
2
INTRODUCTION
Some feel environmental management has, or is developing, a more flexible
and sensitive style than natural resources management: assessment of a situation
leading to an appropriate approach, emphasising stewardship rather than exploitation.
Stewardship implies the management of something with the goal of long-term careful
use and sustainable benefit. The focus of such an approach to environmental
management is multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, or holistic (see chapter 7), and
the style precautionary and participatory. Increasingly, the aim is to promote
sustainable development (Royston, 1978a; Dorney, 1989). It should be noted that a
multidisciplinary approach draws upon various disciplines for information, analytical
skills and insight, but does not seek an integrated understanding. An interdisciplinary
approach draws upon common themes and goes beyond close collaboration between
different specialists to attempt integration, and is very difficult because it involves
blending differently derived concepts (O’Riordan, 1995:2–4). These approaches
demand awareness that issues may be part of complex transnational, even global
environmental, economic and social interaction, which is likely to be affected by
politics, perception and ethics.
Others dismiss much of present-day environmental management as
‘environmental managerialism’ which pays insufficient attention to human-
environment interaction, has become institutionalized, and is essentially a state-
centred process concerned with formulating and implementing laws, policies and
regulations which relate to the environment (Bryant and Wilson, 1998). The difference
in viewpoint may partly reflect theory and practice. Whatever one might wish for
environmental management as a subject, it is used for real-world problems and
consequently managerialism and other shortcomings may creep in. It should be
stressed that environmental management is currently evolving and is far from being
fixed in form.
Environmental management, whatever its approach, is related to, overlaps,
and has to work with environmental planning. The focus of environmental
management is on implementation, monitoring and auditing; on practice and coping
with real-world issues (like modifying human habits that damage nature), rather
than theoretical planning (Hillary, 1995). While a close integration with environmental
planning is desirable, environmental management is a field of study dedicated to
understanding human-environment interactions and the application of science and
common sense to solving problems.
General acceptance that economic development and environmental issues should
not be approached separately came somewhere between 1972 (the UN Conference on
the Human Environment, Stockholm) and 1992 (the UN Conference on Environment
and Development, Rio de Janeiro—the ‘Earth Summit’). By the early 1990s natural
resources management had given way, as Wisner (1990) observed, perhaps unfairly, to
‘a murky philosophical plunge’ towards environmental management.
The definition and scope of environmental management
There is no concise universal definition of environmental management. This is
understandable, given the very broad scope and the diversity of specialisms involved.
3
CHAPTER ONE
A glance at the first four dictionaries on environmental science I came across proved
fruitless, as did an examination of a number of M.Sc. environmental management course
brochures, and a recently published environmental studies book! I offer a selection of
definitions of environmental management culled from the literature in Box 1.1, which
indicates that environmental management displays the following characteristics:
♦ it is often used as a generic term;
♦ it supports sustainable development;
♦ it deals with a world affected by humans (there are few, if any, wholly natural
environments today);
♦ it demands a multidisciplinary or interdisciplinary approach;
♦ it has to integrate different development viewpoints;
♦ it seeks to integrate science, social science, policy making and planning;
♦ it recognizes the desirability of meeting, and if possible exceeding basic human
needs;
♦ the timescale involved extends beyond the short term, and concern ranges from
local to global;
♦ it should show opportunities as well as address threats and problems;
♦ it stresses stewardship, rather than exploitation.
Most sources quoted in Box 1.1 assume there is an optimum balance of natural
resource uses, and that the environmental manager must decide where that lies, using
planning and administrative skills to reach it. This conceptualization usually adopted by
mainstream environmental management is clearly biased towards the anthropocentric,
i.e., the view that environmental issues are considered after development objectives have
been set (Redclift, 1985). There are many who would object to this and advocate other
approaches, for in environmental management there is a wide diversity of beliefs ranging
from anthropocentric to ecocentric. There are growing calls for a reshaping of
environmental management towards greater emphasis on social aspects, perhaps to move
the field closer to human geography to ensure that it is not divorced from key issues of
human-environment interaction (Bryant and Wilson, 1998).
At its simplest, environmental management must do three things: (1)
identify goals; (2) establish whether these can be met; (3) develop and
implement the means to do what it deems possible. (1) is seldom easy: a society
may have no clear idea of what it needs. Indeed, some people may want things
damaging to themselves, others, and the environment. Environmental managers
may have to identify goals, and then win over the public and special-interest
groups. (2) and (3) require the environmental manager to interface with ecology,
economics, law, politics, people, etc., to co-ordinate development. To co-
ordinate a diversity of things is difficult because development proceeds on a
piecemeal, short-term basis—the manner and scale at which most humans
operate. The fact that much of what is done at a given point in time and space
has wider and longer-term impacts, makes it desirable for development to be
managed and co-ordinated at all levels: regional, national and international—
the environmental manager
4
INTRODUCTION
BOX 1.1 Some definitions of environmental management
♦ An approach which goes beyond natural resources management to
encompass the political and social as well as the natural environment…it
is concerned with questions of value and distribution, with the nature of
regulatory mechanisms and with interpersonal, geographic and
intergenerational equity (R.Clarke, Birkbeck College, University of
London: pers. comm.).
♦ Formulation of environmentally sound development strategies.
♦ An interface between scientific endeavour and policy development and
implementation (S.Macgill, Leeds University, UK: pers. comm.).
♦ The process of allocating natural and artificial resources so as to make
optimum use of the environment in satisfying basic human needs at the
minimum, and more if possible, on a sustainable basis (Jolly, 1978).
♦ Seeking the best possible environmental option to promote sustainable
development (paraphrased from several 1990s sustainable development
sources).
♦ Seeking the best practicable environmental option (BPEO), generally
using the best available techniques not entailing excessive cost
(BATNEEC) (based on two widely used environmental management
acronyms).
♦ The control of all human activities which have a significant impact on
the environment.
♦ Management of the environmental performance of organizations, bodies
and companies (Sharratt, 1995).
♦ A decision-making process which regulates the impact of human activities
on the environment in such a manner that the capacity of the environment
to sustain human development will not be impaired (paraphrase from
various 1990s ‘green development’ sources).
♦ Environmental management cannot hope to master all of the issues and
environmental components it has to deal with. Rather, the environmental
manager’s job is to study and try to control processes to try and reach
particular objectives (Royston, 1978b).
♦ Environmental management—a generic description of a process
undertaken by systems-oriented professionals with a natural science,
social science, or less commonly, an engineering, law, or design
background, tackling problems of the human-altered environment on an
interdisciplinary basis from a quantitative and/or futuristic viewpoint
(Dorney, 1989:15).
5
CHAPTER ONE
FIGURE 1.1 A typical scheme of practice adopted for environmental management
Note: Increasingly, stages 1, 2 and 3 are influenced by broad strategic policies, and are
accountable to public scrutiny (as is stage 5). Ideally, lessons learnt at every stage should be
passed on to improve future environmental management—the evaluation of stages 4 and 5 is
especially valuable for future management. At stage 1 the public or a developer may not have
a clear idea of needs or goals, so the environmental manager may need to establish these.
6
INTRODUCTION
must somehow, as Henderson (1981a) advised, ‘think globally, act locally’ —and
adopt a long-term outlook. Figure 1.1 suggests how environmental management is
typically conducted.
Problems and opportunities
Often considerable effort and much money is expended treating symptoms of a
problem but not the causes, which may be difficult to identify and lie well away (in
space or time), along a chain of causation. The risk of making this sort of mistake
should be reduced by the adoption of a careful approach. Even if such an approach
can be used, there is a risk that management will be based on ‘snapshot’ views, so it
is important to use broad-view, long-term and, if possible, gap-free monitoring and
auditing to try to reduce this risk (Born and Sonzogni, 1995).
Environmental management will need to modify the ethics of individuals,
groups and societies to achieve its goals. There are three main approaches:
1 Advisory
♦ through education;
♦ through demonstration (e.g. model farms or factories);
♦ through the media (overt or covert approaches—the latter includes
‘messages’ incorporated in entertainment);
♦ through advice (leaflets, drop-in shops, helplines, etc.).
2 Economic or fiscal
♦ through taxation (‘green’ taxes);
♦ through grants, loans, aid;
♦ through subsidies;
♦ through quotas or trade agreements.
3 Regulatory
♦ through standards;
♦ through restrictions and monitoring;
♦ through licensing;
♦ through zoning (restricting activities to a given area).
One problem faced by environmental managers is that the goal of sustainable
development is not fully formed and its fundamental concepts are still debated.
Sustainable development, like environmental management, is not easily defined (see
Box 1.2). The concept, although it had appeared in the 1970s, was widely disseminated
in the early 1980s by the World Conservation Strategy (IUCN, UNEP and WWF,
1980), which called for the maintenance of essential ecological processes; the
preservation of biodiversity; and sustainable use of species and ecosystems. The
Brundtland Report, Our Common Future (World Commission on Environment and
Development, 1987), placed it on the world’s political agenda and helped rekindle
7
CHAPTER ONE
BOX 1.2 Some definitions of sustainable development
♦ Environmental care ‘married’ to development.
♦ Improving the quality of human life while living within the carrying
capacity of supporting ecosystems.
♦ Development based on the principle of inter-generational (i.e. bequeathing
the same or improved resource endowment to the future that has been
inherited), inter-species and inter-group equity.
♦ Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs.
♦ An environmental ‘handrail’ to guide development.
♦ A change in consumption patterns towards more benign products, and a
shift in investment patterns towards augmenting environmental capital.
♦ A process that seeks to make manifest a higher standard of living (however
interpreted) for human beings…that recognizes this cannot be achieved
at the expense of environmental integrity.
Source: Barrow, 1995b:372
public interest in the environment. It also spread the messages that global
environmental management was needed; and that without a reduction of poverty
ecosystem damage would be difficult to counter. Environmental management is thus
clearly interrelated with socioeconomic development. Twenty years after the World
Conservation Strategy the same three bodies published Caring for the Earth (IUCN,
UNEP and WWF, 1991), which proposed principles intended to help move from
theory to practice.
Sustainable development was in part generated by fears that the materially
comfortable way of life enjoyed in some countries probably cannot be maintained
on anything like a global scale with likely population growth (Pirages, 1994). As a
concept, sustainable development draws upon two, often opposed, intellectual
traditions: one concerned with the limits nature presents to humans, the other with
the potential for human material development (Redclift, 1987:199; Barrow, 1995b).
Interpretation varies a lot:
♦ Some see it as a quest for harmony between humans and their environment;
♦ Some fail to accept that in a finite world there cannot be unlimited growth;
♦ Some feel there can be a shift to less environmentally damaging improvements
in the quality of human life;
♦ Some hope technology will allow limits to be stretched.
There are too many situations where naive, ill-thought-out appeals for
sustainable development are made. This harms the concept, risking its dismissal by
the public and decision makers as shallow, unworkable, and so on. Worse, there are
cases where sustainable development is being used as rhetoric or cunning deceit to
8
INTRODUCTION
mislead people. Some fear calls for sustainable development may be a way of
sidestepping more radical socioeconomic reform. Environmental management must
police the use of the concept to prevent its misuse for propaganda or it will become
devalued (genetic engineering is subject to similar misleading propaganda which
could make its responsible use difficult if the public loses trust).
‘Mainstream’ sustainable development typically urges:
♦ the maintenance of ecological integrity;
♦ the integration of environmental care and development;
♦ the adoption of an internationalist (North-South interdependence) stance;
♦ the satisfaction of at least basic, human needs for all;
♦ ‘utilitarian conservation’;
♦ concern for inter-generational, inter-group and inter-species equity;
♦ the application of science, technology and environmental knowledge to world
development;
♦ the acceptance of some economic growth (within limits);
♦ the adoption of a long-term view.
The question is whether sustainable development is going to act just as a guiding
principle (which in itself is valuable) or whether it generates practical strategies that
improve human well-being and prevent environmental degradation. It is not only
misuse of sustainable development language by the media, politicians, activists and
commerce that poses a problem: some academics and environmental managers are
careless. Care is needed to ensure that sustainable development is a realistic objective
based on workable strategy.
Environmental problems often do not have a single simple solution. Their solution
presents alternatives and challenges; environmental management therefore faces
dilemmas (Bennett, 1992:5–9): (1) Ethical dilemmas—e.g. what to conserve—Inuit
hunters or whales? (2) Efficiency dilemmas—e.g. how much environmental damage is
acceptable? (3) Equity dilemmas—e.g. who benefits from environmental management
decisions, and who pays? (4) Liberty dilemmas—e.g. to what degree must people be
restricted to protect the environment? (5) Uncertainty dilemmas—e.g. how to choose
a course of action without adequate knowledge or data? (6) Evaluation dilemmas—
e.g. how to compare different effects of various options or actions?
Human beings often respond to perceived crisis, rather than carefully assessing
the situation and acting to prevent problems. With sustainable development as a central
goal, crisis management is a dangerous practice, for, once manifest, problems may not
be easily solved and could jeopardize sustainability. The solution is to adopt the
precautionary principle (see chapter 3 for further discussion) (Bodansky, 1991; Costanza
and Cornwell, 1992; O’Riordan and Cameron, 1995; Francis, 1996). The precautionary
principle shifts the burden of proof that a proposal is safe from the ‘victim’ to the
‘developer’ (O’Riordan, 1995:8–10). It also makes sense because environmental
management often deals with inadequate data, may have to rely on modelling that is
deficient, and has to cope with issues that are complex and not fully understood.
9
CHAPTER ONE
Decision making is often affected by ‘polarized perceptions’ (ideas based more
on stakeholders’ prejudice, misconception or greed than objectivity) (Baarschers,
1996). Even if the environmental manager is objective, powerful special-interest
groups (e.g. the rich; government ministers; lobby groups; non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), industry, the military) may not be. Problems are often caused
by sovereignty or strategic arguments which threaten common-sense decisions and
make transboundary issues difficult to resolve. The environmental manager must
manipulate these forces, trading off stakeholders’ desires against protecting the
environment. Little remains fixed: demands from various stakeholders alter, the
environment changes, public attitudes shift, human capabilities vary—so
environmental management must be flexible, adaptive and perceptive (Holling, 1978).
Co-ordination of environment and development requires awareness of
environmental and human limits, potential and risks or hazards. For most of human
history worries have mainly been caused by the acquisition of inputs (food, water, fuel,
etc.); over the last century have appeared added problems over outputs (pollution and
waste). Environmental problems are commonly caused by human behaviour, notably
consumerism; another challenge is the growing human population; another is poverty.
Somehow, environmental management has to separate what is real from vague abstractions
and fashionable attitudes (Wisner, 1990). It is widely argued that environmental
management must address poverty and encourage the use of aid to prevent people
degrading their surroundings. These issues were debated, but by no means resolved, at
the 1992 Earth Summit, and most environmental managers accept that a component of
any strategy for sustainable development is the satisfaction of basic human needs.
Environmental managers are increasingly likely to face:
♦ an unproven threat;
♦ transboundary or global challenges;
♦ problems demanding rapid decisions;
♦ an increasing exchange of information with NGOs via the Internet and various
other networks. This means that environmental managers must keep abreast of
the activities of many bodies (it also offers possibilities for alliances, and data
gathering from different sources).
Modern science has traditionally adopted a reductionist approach, with
disciplinary specialists studying components of a problem and avoiding any
judgement or advice to managers or planners before there is adequate proof.
Environmental managers have to deal with uncertainty and complex problems which
often cannot afford to wait long enough for proof to be obtained. Reductionist
approaches may be too slow when there is pressure to give advice (Funtowicz and
Ravetz, 1991). Something may have the potential to cause serious, possibly
irreversible problems unless prompt action is taken but it has not actually been proved
to be a threat (the classic case being global warming). Environmental management
may have to rely on modelling, simulation and forecasts rather than factual
predictions—it may be necessary to resort to advocacy without proof, and identify
the agency and the mechanism whereby advocacy can be pursued (Redclift, 1984:44).
10
INTRODUCTION
The last few decades have seen the recognition of more and more transboundary
or global threats. However, there have been helpful developments: environmental
management can now draw on improved knowledge of the structure and function of
the environment, and of human institution-building, group interaction and perceptions,
and new tools are available which improve monitoring, data gathering, impact
assessment, information processing, decision making and communication. Though
environmental managers face growing problems, they have more powerful aids to
draw upon. These developments mean it is possible for environmental management
to move away from corrective to anticipatory approaches (adopting the precautionary
principle).
Who are environmental managers? A wide range of bodies professionals are
involved in environmental management: government agencies (e.g. the European
Environmental Agency), international bodies and aid organizations (like the UNEP,
FAO, World Bank, USAID, etc.), research institutes (e.g. the Worldwatch Institute,
IIED, etc.), NGOs (e.g. WWF, IUCN, Friends of the Earth, etc.); the public (see Box
1.2). Identifying a single environmental manager in a given situation may be like
trying to identify who built a Boeing 747 aircraft.
What motivates environmental management? One or more of the following
may lead to its adoption:
♦ Pragmatic reasons—fear or common sense makes people or administrators
seek to avoid a problem.
♦ Desire to save costs—it may be cheaper to avoid problems or counter them
than suffer the consequences (pollution, litigation, etc.). There may also be
advantages in waste recovery, energy conservation, and maintaining
environmental quality.
♦ Compliance—individuals, local government, companies, states, etc., may be
required by laws, national or international agreement to care for the
environment.
♦ Shift in ethics—research, the media, individuals or groups of activists may
trigger new attitudes, agreements or laws.
♦ Macro-economics—promotion of environmental management may lead to
economic expansion: a market for pollution control equipment, use of recovered
waste, more secure and efficient energy and raw materials supply; or there
may be advantages in ‘internalizing externalities’ (see pareto optimum
discussion in chapter 5).
Criticism of environmental management
With something as broad and ambitious as environmental management, criticism
is inevitable. The problem of its definition has been discussed, another frequently
voiced worry is that it is prescriptive and insufficiently analytical. It also attracts
criticism because it involves subjective judgement as well as scientific enquiry,
and is as much an art as a science.
11
CHAPTER ONE
Sometimes it is the approach to environmental management that causes
offence—some over-zealous efforts have been tantamount to ‘eco-fascism’ (Pepper,
1984: 204). Redclift (1985) warned of ‘environmental managerialism’, symptoms
of which include: the consideration of the environment after development objectives
have been set; the tendency to plunge into techniques regardless of whether they are
needed; and failing to see the wood for the trees. Too often environmental management
is pursued as a reactive, piecemeal approach, working on projects that have
environmental objectives or components designed to mitigate, rather than avoid,
environmental impacts (Schramm and Warford, 1989:8). Environmental management
must go beyond monitoring and reacting and adopt a longer term view than has been
the case with most planners and politicians. A longer term view improves the chances
of avoiding problems and, when it does not, allows time to develop contingency
plans, acquire technology, etc.
Environmental management has developed in western democracies where there
is relative freedom of access to information (e.g. in the USA through the Freedom of
Information Act; in Europe through the European Directive 82/501/EEC—Article 8
of which requires that local communities have information about any hazardous
installation) (Haefele, 1973). Now environmental management needs to be adapted
to suit different social and political conditions.
The establishment of environmental management
A number of developments have helped establish environmental management:
1 The public in an increasing number of countries have become environmentally
aware and unwilling to trust government and corporations to protect the
environment. This has largely grown out of their witnessing accidents, misuse
of resources, and from concern about ecological threats.
2 NGOs, international agencies, business and governments have started to pursue
environmental management.
3 The media monitor and report on environmental issues.
4 International conferences, agreements and declarations have publicized issues
and supported environmental management.
5 The establishment in 1973 of the UN Environment Programme (UNEP).
6 The 1969 US National Environmental Protection Act (passed 1970) and the
creation of the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in 1970.
7 Publications in North America and Europe which raised environmental concern
after the mid-1960s.
8 The development of green politics since the 1970s.
9 Aid and funding agencies in the late 1970s began to require environmental
assessments and environmental management before supporting development.
10 The Brundtland Report (World Commission on Environment and Development,
1987) increased awareness of the need for environmental care.
12
INTRODUCTION
At the time of the UN Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm
(1972) few countries had environmental ministries, few newspapers had
environmental editors, or broadcasting companies environmental producers. By the
1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development, Rio (the Earth Summit)
most countries had environmental ministries and media interest had vastly increased.
The release of Agenda 21 (UN, 1992; Keating, 1993; Local Government Management
Board, 1994) encouraged governments and other bodies to develop environmental
management. For example, Agenda 21 has been adapted to local needs in a number
of countries (Patterson and Theobald, 1995; Evans, 1995). Since the early 1990s the
European Union (EU) and the UK have published policy documents on sustainable
development (Commission of the European Community, 1992; Department of
Environment, 1994), Europe has established an Environmental Management and
Audit System (EMAS), international environmental standards have been developed,
and most countries now require impact assessments before developments proceed.
Environmental management shows considerable variation in style and it is still
evolving. It is applied to very different environments, some more ‘natural’ than others:
marine, urban, rural, arid, mountainous, wetlands, etc. A step towards further
improvement is to assess what problems it has encountered and why (Trudgill, 1990).
After this brief outline of the evolution, characteristics and problems of
environmental management, it is useful to present a picture of its principles (i.e. its
main truths and laws), or at least its main themes. Broadly, the main principles of
environmental management are prudence and stewardship. These are pursued via:
♦ forward-looking, broad-view policy making and planning (mainly left to various
planners to undertake);
♦ establishing standards and rules, monitoring and auditing;
♦ co-ordination (the environmental manager adopting a multidisciplinary,
interdisciplinary or holistic approach);
♦ operationalization/implementation.
Sustainable development is linked to prudence and stewardship as a goal; another is
usually human welfare, though there might be situations where long-term human
well-being or conservation aims overrule this.
Since the mid-1980s new branches have appeared on the evolutionary tree of
environmental management (and are discussed in the following chapters):
♦ environmental law;
♦ green business;
♦ impact, risk and hazard assessment;
♦ total quality management (TQM), which has led to total environmental quality
management;
♦ environmental standards;
♦ eco-auditing;
♦ environmental management systems.
13
CHAPTER ONE
Recommended reading and resources
Introductory books and handbooks
Brown, L.R. (ed.) (annual) State of the World: a WorldWatch Institute report on
progress toward a sustainable society. Norton, New York (readable annual
review of environmental issues and release of data collected by WWI).
O’Riordan, T. (ed.) (1995) Environmental Science for Environmental Management.
Addison Wesley Longman, Harlow.
O’Riordan, T. and Turner, R.K. (eds) (1983) An Annotated Reader in Environmental
Planning and Management. Pergamon, Oxford.
Owen, L. and Unwin, T. (1997) Environmental Management: readings and case
studies. Blackwell, Oxford.
Theodore, L., Dupont, R.R. and Baxter, T.E. (1998) Environmental Management:
problems and solutions. CRC Press, Boulder (Springer, New York) (see part 1).
UNDP (1992) Handbook and Guidelines for Environmental Management and
Sustainable Development. United Nations Development Programme, New York.
UNEP/INFOTERRA/IDS (1997) Guide to Environment and Development Sources
of Information on CD-ROM and the Internet. Intermediate Technology
Publications, London.
Wilson, G.A. and Bryant, R.L. (1997) Environmental Management: new directions
for the twenty-first century. University College London Press, London.
Abstracts
Cambridge Scientific Abstracts
Environmental Abstracts—Bethesda MD 20814–3389
GeoAbstracts—Elsevier, Norwich, UK NR3 3AP
Internet
This is a small selection, and it should be noted that these sources change, may
disappear, and are often of unknown provenance (compared with established
journals, etc.).
Katz, M. and Thornton, D. (1997) Environmental Management Tools on the Internet.
Soil and Water Conservation Society, Ankeny, ISBN 1–57444059–4.
Schumann, R.W. III (ed.) (1994) Eco-data: using your PC to obtain free environmental
information. Government Institutes Inc., Rockville (MD 20850).
http://www.eea.dk/frames/main.html — European Environmental Agency.
http://www.epa.gov/global warming — Global warming.
http://www.gn.apc.org — Green Net home page.
http://www.iied.org — International Institute for Environment and Development (in
UK telephone 0171 388 2117).
http://www.iucn.org — IUCN home page.
14
INTRODUCTION
http://www.Panda.org/home.htm — WWF International.
http://www.unep.ch — UNEP site, conference information.
http://www.www.wyw.ac.uk — University of London, Wye College postgraduate
environmental management courses by distance learning.
Professional bodies
The Chartered Institution of Water and Environmental Management (UK) EIA Centre,
Manchester University (UK) Environmental Auditors Registration Association (UK)
Institute of Environmental Assessment (UK) Institution of Environmental Sciences
(UK) International Association of Impact Assessment (USA)
Journals which publish environmental management and related articles
Ambio
Costing the Earth
Ecological Economics
Ecological Modelling
Ecologist
ENDS—Environmental Data Service UK
Environment
Environment and Behavior
Environment & Ecology
Environment and Planning-A
Environment and Urbanization
Environmental Assessment
Environmental Conservation
Environmental Impact Assessment Review
Environmental Law
Environmental Management
Environmental Monitoring & Assessment
Environmental & Resource Economics
Environmental Science & Technology
Environmental Values
Environmentalist
Environmetrics
European Environment
GeoJournal
Global Environment Change
Human Ecology
Impact Assessment (now Impact Assessment and Project Appraisal)
International Environmental Affairs
International Journal of Ecology & Environmental Sciences
International Journal of Environmental Studies (section A)
Journal of Arid Environments
15
CHAPTER ONE
Journal of Environment & Development
Journal of Environmental Economics
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
Journal of Environmental Management
Journal of Environmental Law
Journal of Environmental Planning & Management
Journal of Risk Analysis
Journal of Sustainable Agriculture
Journal of Sustainable Development
Land Degradation & Development
Natural Resources Forum
Natural Resources Journal
Nature & Resources
Resources Policy
Risk, Decision and Policy
Rocky Mountain Institute Newsletter
Science of the Total Environment
Society & Environment
Society & Natural Resources
Sustainable Development (UK)
Sustainable Development (New Delhi, India)
16
Chapter 2
Environmental
management fundamentals
and goals
♦ The nature of environmental management 18
♦ The implications of human population
growth 19
♦ Limits to growth, sustainable development
and environmental ethics 22
♦ Environmental management: problems and
needs 25
♦ Recommended reading 27
17
In 1975 Sewell (1975:ix) felt the environmental manager should ‘be able to manipulate
both social institutions and appropriate technologies but must do this with the
sensitivity of an artist, the insights of a poet, and, perhaps, the moral purity and
determination of a religious zealot’.
The nature of environmental management
Environmental management is an approach to environmental stewardship which
integrates ecology, policy making, planning and social development. Its goals include:
♦ the prevention and resolution of environmental problems;
♦ establishing limits;
♦ establishing and nurturing institutions that effectively support environmental
research, monitoring and management;
♦ warning of threats and identifying opportunities;
♦ sustaining and, if possible improving, existing resources;
♦ where possible improving ‘quality of life’;
♦ identifying new technology or policies that are useful.
It is clear that these goals conceal a wealth of issues. Clearly, short-term goals must
be embedded within an overall vision (Dorney, 1989:5). Without overall vision it is
difficult to avoid fragmented decision making, or to adopt a long-term view, or to
prioritize and identify urgent tasks. Environmental management thus demands
‘scoping’ (deciding goals and setting limits on efforts) before acting. However, this
is often neglected.
Since the early 1970s popular texts have often published variants of ‘Laws of
Ecology’ (based on four ‘laws’ published by Commoner (1971) (environmental
management implications are in parenthesis):
1 Any intrusion into nature has numerous effects, many of which are unpredictable
(environmental management must cope with the unexpected).
2 Because ‘everything is connected’, humans and nature are inextricably bound
together; what one person does affects others (environmental management must
consider chains of causation, looking beyond the local and short term).
3 Care needs to be taken that substances produced by humans do not interfere
with any of the Earth’s biogeochemical processes (environmental management
must monitor natural processes and human activities to ensure no crucial
process is upset).
18
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT FUNDAMENTALS
In recent years some environmental managers have begun to express their
overall vision and goals by publishing an environmental policy statement—to show
intent, identify priorities and principles, and give a sense of purpose. While this
informs the public, it does not guarantee sound environmental management.
Environmental managers must assume there is an optimum balance between
environmental protection and allowing human activities. Establishing where that
balance lies depends largely on ethics. Clark (1989) argued that at its core
environmental management asks two questions: (1) What kind of planet do we
want? (2) What kind of planet can we get? Even if agreement on an optimum
balance can be reached, the approach to environmental management goals can
take different paths.
Environmental management has not evolved in isolation: regional planners
often adopt a human ecology approach, other planners a systems analysis or an
ecosystem approach. For example, McHarg (1969) used river basins, and Doxiadis
(1977) tried to develop a science of planning settlement in balance with nature—
ekistics. Rapoport (1993:175) recognized two main groupings: those who adopt a
horticultural metaphor—Garden Earth—and those who prefer one that is more
technological—Spaceship Earth. The variety of challenges, and the fact that many
different actors are involved (e.g. the public, commercial interests, professions, local
and national government, special-interest groups, the voluntary sector), means that
in practice environmental managers often focus on a region, ecosystem, sector of
activity, or resource (Box 2.1).
Environmental managers may not achieve their objectives, might be criticized
(or sued), fall into disrepute with those who employ them, and lose public trust. So,
like most administrators, environmental managers are likely to follow risk-aversion
strategies, including:
♦ working to safe minimum standards;
♦ adopting sustainability constraints;
♦ following a ‘win-win’ or ‘least regrets’ approach (i.e. actions which seek
benefits whatever the outcome; actions which seek to reduce unwanted impacts,
respectively).
Effectively, these all conserve or protect the environment unless social costs are very
high. Following the precautionary principle is not costless. In many situations it has
high costs as some things have to be forgone to keep open escape options (Earll,
1992; Pearce, 1994:1337).
The implications of human population growth
In the late eighteenth century Thomas Malthus examined the factors limiting human
population growth. His thesis was that human population growth puts pressure on
the means of subsistence, throwing it out of balance with the environment so that
there is population collapse. Interest in the limits to human population was rekindled
19
CHAPTER TWO
BOX 2.1 Approaches to environmental management
(There may be overlap between groupings, and within categories.
Environmental managers may be more or less anthropocentric or ecocentric,
more or less ‘green’, more or less supportive of technology. There is also a
wide spectrum of political and philosophical stances, all of which colour the
approach adopted)
Ad hoc approach: approach developed in reaction to a specific situation
Problem-solving approach: follows a series of logical steps to identify problems
and needs and implement solutions (see Figure 1.1)
Systems approach: for example
♦ ecosystem (mountain; high latitude; savanna; desert; island; lake, etc.)
(Dasmann et al., 1973; Ruddle and Manshard, 1981)†
♦ agro-ecosystem (Conway, 1985a and b)
Regional approach: mainly ecological zones or biogeophysical units, which
can sometimes be international—i.e. involve different states, e.g. an
internationally-shared river basin. For example:
♦ watershed (Easter et al., 1986)†
♦ river basin (Friedman and Weaver, 1979; Barrow, 1998)†
♦ coastal zone†
♦ island
♦ command area development authority (irrigation-related)
♦ administrative region
♦ sea (e.g. Mediterranean; North Sea; Baltic; Aral Sea, etc.)†
Specialist discipline approach: often adopted by professionals. For example:
♦ air quality management
♦ water quality management
♦ land management
♦ environmental health
♦ urban management
♦ ocean management
♦ human ecology approach
♦ tourism management/ecotourism
♦ conservation area management
Strategic environmental management approach: (see chapter 6)
20
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT FUNDAMENTALS
Voluntary sector approach: environmental management by, or encouraged and
supported by NGOs. For example
♦ debt-for-nature swaps
♦ private reserves
♦ ‘ginger groups’ which try to prompt environmental management
♦ private funding for research or environmental management
Commercial approach: environmental management for business/public bodies
Political economy or political ecology approach: (see chapter 13) (Blaikie, 1985)
Human ecology approach: (see chapter 13)
† = biogeophysical systems
in the 1970s by a group of ecologists, systems analysts, demographers and
‘environmentalists’ who came to be known as neo-Malthusians (e.g. Ehrlich et al.,
1970). For a given species and situation, population tends to grow until it encounters
a critical resource limit or controlling factor, whereupon there is a gradual or sudden,
limited or catastrophic decline in numbers, or a shift to a cyclic boom-and-bust pattern.
Neo-Malthusians saw population growth as the primary cause for concern, although
a few also focused on the growing threat from ‘careless technology’ (Farvar and
Milton, 1972). One of the neo-Malthusians, Hardin (1968), focused on collective
damage as a consequence of inadequately controlled individual actions, something
of concern to modern environmental management. Hardin’s ‘tragedy of the commons’
essay (and related works) argued that commonly owned natural resources under
conditions of population growth would be damaged because each user would seek to
maximize their short-term interests (see chapter 5). This thesis is now largely dismissed
as simplistic, together with much of the neo-Malthusian theory, for failing to examine
the social and historical context of population growth. The link between population
growth and environment is more complex than neo-Malthusians acknowledged.
While 1970s neo-Malthusian and environmentalist publications were largely
dogmatic warnings or pleas for change (Hardin, 1974a; 1974b), weak on proof and
workable strategies, they did trigger an awareness that in a finite world there were
limits. In practice, there are complex environment—population linkages and
feedbacks, for example, the speed of population growth related to the ability to upgrade
technology may be crucial. Damage to the environment can be a function of:
1 human population numbers;
2 high levels of consumption of that population (i.e. lifestyle);
3 technology used to satisfy consumption and dispose of waste (Harrison, 1990).
Contradicting neo-Malthusian theories, Boserüp (1965; 1981; 1990) explored
how population increase, provided it does not overwhelm the adaptive ability of
21
CHAPTER TWO
people, may prompt social and technological changes leading to improved quality
of life (see also: Turner and Ali, 1996). Tiffen (1993; 1995; et al., 1994) documents
situations where not only has population growth led to innovation that improved
quality of life, it has also reduced environmental degradation. This prompts the
questions: How often can that pattern be achieved? What must be done to encourage
such a pattern?
While there are Boserüpian grounds for tempering Malthusian and neo-
Malthusian pessimism, world-wide there has been breakdown of established
livelihood strategies and environmental degradation. There are also situations where
a very low human population, or transboundary pollution of virtually undisturbed
areas, are causing environmental damage. On a global scale there do seem to be too
many humans, so environmental managers will have to establish what optimum
sustainable population is, and how it can best be reached. Some demographers argue
that only within the next decade or so will it be possible to achieve such a population
with humane approaches (Hartshorn, 1991:401).
Limits to growth, sustainable development and
environmental ethics
When neo-Malthusians were drawing attention to limits, the Club of Rome (an
informal international group concerned about the predicament of humanity) reported
on a systems dynamics computer world-model (Meadows et al., 1972: The Limits to
Growth). This publication reported on studies to determine future scenarios, using
global forecasts of accelerating industrialization; population growth; rates of
malnutrition; depletion of non-renewable resources; and a deteriorating environment.
The report was designed to promote public interest, and concluded that ‘If present
growth trends…continue unchanged, the limits to growth on this planet will be reached
within the next hundred years’ (by 2072). Meadows and his colleagues concluded
that by effective environmental management—a condition of adequate ‘ecological
and economic stability’ could be sustained.
With The Limits to Growth in mind, some began calling for reduced or even
‘zero growth’. However, any state embracing such ethics would face considerable
disruption of its economy. From the early 1970s there was a much more palatable
alternative—sustainable development. This seemed to offer a way for continued
growth to avoid conflict with environmental limits (Barrow, 1995b). The goals of
sustainable development and the Club of Rome are the same—adequate sustained
quality of life for all without exceeding environmental limits. It is possible to stretch
some limits, using technology, so sustainable development may be pursued not just
by altering demands or finding resource substitutes.
In a sequel to The Limits to Growth the same principal authors refined their
original systems dynamics model and fed in much-improved data. Beyond the Limits
(Meadows et al., 1992) argued that the 1972 warnings were broadly correct, that
some of the limits have already been exceeded, and that, if present trends continue,
there is virtually certain to be global collapse within the lifetime of children alive
today see Figure 2.1). However, they argue that it is still possible to have ‘overshoot
22
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT FUNDAMENTALS
FIGURE 2.1 Time horizon of the World3 model
Source: Meadows et al. (1992:235, Fig. 8.1)
23
CHAPTER TWO
but not collapse’, and to achieve the goal of sustainable development if excessive
population growth and material consumption are cut and there is increase in
efficiency of materials and energy use soon. Beyond the Limits throws down an
urgent challenge to environmental management and indicates a timescale for
action.
For effective environmental management there must be means of resolving
controversies regarding proper conduct (Cairns and Crawford, 1991:23): to a large
degree ethics enable this. Ethics can be defined as a system of cultural values
motivating people’s behaviour (Rapoport, 1993). They draw upon human reasoning,
morals, knowledge of nature, and goals to act as a sort of plumb-line for development
and shape a worldview. Ethics operate at the level of individuals, institutions, societies,
and internationally. Some environmentalists have blamed Judaeo-Christian ethics
for the tendency over the last two thousand years for western peoples to see themselves
in dominion over nature, and to pursue strategies of exploitation, rather than of
stewardship (White, 1967).
From the late sixteenth century the Protestant ethic spread in the west, and
ideas of utopia were discussed—the individual was encouraged to be responsible
for self-improvement through good acts and hard work (Weber, 1958; Hill, 1964).
However, few tried to shift laissez-faire attitudes towards environmental
management before the 1960s. Activists in the 1960s and 1970s added little to
environmental science; however, they did stimulate a quest for new development
and environment ethics (Cheny, 1989; Dower, 1989; Barrow, 1995a:14–16). From
the 1980s interest in the environment has grown, stimulating books and journals
(e.g. Environmental Ethics; Ethics & Behaviour; Ethics, Place and Environment;
Environmental Values; Science, Technology & Human Values). Interestingly, some
progressive environmental ethics literature has come from business. Unfortunately,
there is plenty of environmental ethics theory, but little ethical pragmatism! Carley
and Christie (1992:78) tried to summarize the range of environmental ethics,
dividing them into:
(a) Technocratic environmental ethics=resource-exploitative, growth-oriented;
(b) Managerial environmental ethics=resource-conservationist, oriented to
sustainable growth;
(c) Communalist environmental ethics=resource-preservationist, oriented to limited
or zero growth;
(d) Bioethicist or deep ecology environmental ethics=extreme preservationist, anti-
growth.
Grouping (a) is anthropocentric and places faith in the capacity of technology to
overcome problems. Grouping (d) is unlikely to attract support from enough
people to be a viable approach, and offers little guidance to environmental
managers. Carley and Christie felt the ethics of groups (b) and (c) were more
likely to support sustainable development and provide guidance for environmental
management.
24
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT FUNDAMENTALS
Environmental management: problems and needs
Westerners have tended to see themselves as being at war with nature, rather than
seeking to understand it and then trying to exist within its constraints. The environment
was to be ‘tamed’, and unspoilt lands were ‘wastelands’. Since the 1930s the last
land frontiers have been closing, and unsettled areas capable of giving a good
livelihood are increasingly difficult to find. By the mid-1960s the limitless world
was seen to have shrunk to Spaceship Earth, a finite and delicate system which must
be taken care of if it is to support humanity. The Gaian viewpoint goes further,
regarding the Earth as a system which, if upset by careless development, might adjust
in such a way as to make current lifestyles impossible or even eliminate humans.
Environmental management therefore faces complex environmental challenges
which may reach crisis level within fifty years. It will have to cope with these in the
face of growing human population, increasing poverty, likely social unrest, and
perhaps natural disasters. Anticipatory action seems to hold most promise, and people
will have to be involved more than has been the case with planning and management
in the past. How will environmental management achieve its policy goals? Through
a mix of moral pressure, the spread of appropriate ethics, and by ensuring economics,
business and law are sufficiently sensitive to the needs of the environment.
Environmental management will need to make use of education and the media to
alter social attitudes so that there is an acceptance of a new ethics. It will also have to
draw upon other fields to achieve its goals, and must have effective institutions.
Manuals, guides, checklists, conventions and agreements can help guide the
identification of goals and preparation of action plans and their implementation.
The reductionist approach of splitting problems into component parts for
study and solution lies at the core of western rational, scientific study. Some feel a
holistic ‘overall view’ approach should replace ‘compartmentalized and inflexible
science’; I feel that is a mistake—there is a need for both (Risser, 1985; Savory,
1988; Atkinson, 1991a:154; Rapoport, 1993:176).
Environmental management involves a series of decisions (Figure 2.2). How
these are made depends on whether a technocratic or a consultative model is adopted.
The latter has become the usual pattern in the USA and Canada, and is increasingly
being chosen in Japan and Europe, reflecting the trend towards freedom of
information. Whatever the overall approach, environmental management is, as
Matthews et al. (1976:5) noted, a ‘myriad of individual and collective decisions by
persons, groups, and organizations’ and ‘together these decisions and interactions
constitute a process—a process that in effect results in management (or
mismanagement) of the environmental resources of a society’.
Of the many problems that beset environmental management, inadequate
data is a common hindrance: there are still huge gaps in knowledge of the structure
and function of the environment, the workings of global, regional and local
economics, and of how societies and individual humans behave. The ideal is
adequate data that can be presented in real time, so that the scenario can be observed
as it changes. With improved computers, software and the development of tools
25
CHAPTER TWO
FIGURE 2.2 Major decision-making steps in a typical environmental management process
Source: Part-based on Matthews et al. (1976:10, Fig. 1)
like geographical information systems (GIS) this may one day be possible, but
often all that is available today is an occasional, incomplete snapshot view.
Decision making is often made difficult by politics; lobbying; media, public
and NGOs’ attention; lack of funding and expertise. Environmental managers are faced
with two temporal challenges: (1) problems may suddenly demand attention and allow
little time for solution; (2) the desirability that planning horizons stretch further into
the future than has been usual practice. Decisions are easier to make and policies more
easily adjusted if there is time available—for example, a 3°C climate change over 150
years may not be too much of a challenge, but if it happens over 20 years it certainly
would be (Chiapponi, 1992). Predictions are difficult enough with stable environments;
once stability has been upset there may be unexpected and sudden feedbacks or shifts
to different states, all of which are difficult to forecast. The behaviour of economic
systems are even more difficult to predict, and human behaviour is especially fickle as
tastes and attitudes alter. The unpredictability and rapidity of challenges prompted
Holling (1978) to argue for adaptive assessment and management.
Sustainable development calls for trade-offs. For example, it may be necessary
to forgo immediate benefits to secure long-term yields—which may far outweigh
the former. Such trade-offs can be a cruel choice for individuals, groups or countries,
and a minefield for the environmental manager (and it is a situation where foreign
aid could be focused to cushion trade-offs).
Institutional problems probably present more difficulties for environmental
management than technical or scientific challenges (Cairns and Crawford, 1991).
26
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT FUNDAMENTALS
Human institutions change and can be difficult to understand and control and building
new ones may be hard. It is vital that the institutions involved in environmental
management are effective. Even if there is technology and funding and a will to
solve a problem, success will be unlikely without the right type of sustainable
institution. A growing number of social scientists have been focusing on institution
building: this gives us grounds for optimism. The major international body charged
with environmental management, the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP),
was designed in the 1960s (and founded in 1973), and needs remodelling to be more
effective (Von Moltke, 1992). The UNEP was located away from Paris, Geneva or
New York, in Nairobi, which has had mixed results—some argue it is off the beaten
track and this partly explains its poor funding and lack of power. To be fair to
institutions like the UNEP, they must rely on the quality of their arguments to convince
countries and multinational companies (MNCs) or transnational companies (TNCs)
to accept a strategy, and have been given little in the way of sanctions to enforce
policies.
Recommended reading
Journals which publish articles on the fundamentals of environmental
management
Environmental Management
Ethics, Place and Environment
Journal of Environmental Management
27
Chapter 3
Environmental
management—
business and law
♦ Environmental management and business 30
♦ Corporate environmental management in the
1990s 32
♦ Corporate visions of stewardship—a paradigm
shift to environmental management ethics? 33
♦ Approaches adopted to promote
environmental management in business 34
♦ Environmental management and business:
the current situation 41
♦ Environmental management and law 41
♦ The 1969 US National Environmental Policy
Act (NEPA) —‘environmental Magna Carta’? 45
♦ European Law and environmental management 46
♦ International law and environmental
management 48
♦ Indigenous peoples and environmental law 49
♦ The 1992 UN Conference on Environment and
Development 50
♦ International law and sovereignty issues 50
♦ Alternative dispute resolution 55
♦ Recommended reading and resources 56
29
‘Our products reflect our philosophy…respect for other cultures, the past, the
natural world, and our customers. It’s a partnership of profits with principles’.
(Anita Roddick—The Body Shop promotional literature 1990)
Business and legal aspects of environmental management have developed
greatly and generated huge interest in recent decades. This chapter presents an
overview.
In many respects business and legal aspects are the cutting-edge of
environmental management. Business drives a lot of human activity, and can degrade
people and the environment, or offer routes to new development ethics and sustainable
development. Law provides guidelines and rules for arbitration, without which chaos
and destruction ensue. Both these aspects of environmental management must evolve
rapidly to face challenges like globalization and transboundary problems adequately.
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND BUSINESS
By the late seventeenth century in the Caribbean, Mauritius, and many other places,
trade in sugar, timber and other commodities by bodies like the Dutch East Indies
Company and the (British) East India Company and clearances by numerous smaller
plantation owners were causing deforestation and soil erosion (Grove, 1995). By the
1830s, English Romantic socialist-environmentalists like William Morris, and in
Russia the proto-anarchist Pyotr Kropotkin began to criticize industrialization for its
pollution, human degradation and shoddy products (MacCarthy, 1994). But there
was little popular protest until the 1960s, by which time people in developed countries
had improved standards of living and enjoyed sufficient free time and access to a
more or less democratic media, to become aware of and lobby for environmental
issues. Accidents like the Torrey Canyon oil-tanker spillage and pollution disasters
like Three Mile Island, Love Canal and Seveso had raised public awareness in USA
and Europe by the mid-1970s. Also environmental NGOs, consumer protection groups
and popular writers (like Carson, 1962) fanned public interest.
Accidents prompted environmental controls. Also by the 1970s American NGOs
and groups of lawyers interested in environmental issues (notably the Environmental
Defense Fund and the Natural Resources Defense Fund) began to fight group court
actions against those damaging nature and lobbied for environmental legislation. In
Europe and New Zealand green politics began to emerge. Research and contact between
scientists increased after the 1957–8 International Geophysical Year, leading to
improving awareness of environmental issues, better understanding of Earth’s structure
and function, the development of international standards, and sharing of data.
30
BUSINESS AND LAW
The USA passed the 1969 National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) in 1970,
and established an Environmental Protection Agency (Seldner and Cottrel, 1994:
61–96). The UN held the 1972 Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm,
and in 1973 established the UN Environmental Program (UNEP). A deluge of
publications fanned concern for the environment and realization there was a need to
review practices and ethics, e.g. Schumacher’s (1973) Small Is Beautiful voiced
concern about material consumption, pollution and uncaring business. Overall, the
mid-sixties to mid-seventies was a decade of increasing environmental concern.
NEPA required developers to meet environmental standards, and effectively
promoted the precautionary principle. Business was also being prompted by legislation,
public opinion and self-interest to pay attention to the environment. It was not enough
to obey the law and reduce liability, there was a need to look concerned—what Brenton
called ‘defensive greenness’ (1994:148). Some companies saw opportunities for
commercial gain through environmental management—building a green image and
marketing environmentally friendly products or providing services for environmental
management (Greeno and Robinson, 1992). There was a realization that ‘end-of-pipe’
solutions (i.e. cleaning up rather than prevention) were more costly, gave a bad public
image, and that environmental management could be a way of cutting costs to get a
‘competitive edge’ (Beaumont, 1992:201; Taylor, 1992; Winter, 1994).
Other factors have prompted business interest in environmental management:
♦ globalization (i.e. media, finance, etc., becoming global);
♦ ‘glasnost’ (i.e. increasing public demand for access to information);
♦ activity of green business groups, especially since the 1992 UN Conference
on Environment and Development;
♦ trade union and NGO concern for environmental issues;
♦ a wish by companies to reduce inspection by regulatory bodies;
♦ insistence by funding, insurance and licensing bodies that impact assessment
and eco-audit be conducted;
♦ ethical (green) investment policies adopted by some companies (in the USA a
group of powerful investors now apply a set of environmental policy
principles—the ‘Valdez Principles’) (North, 1992);
♦ genuine sense of responsibility (some companies have been founded by people
with a strong sense of moral duty);
♦ avoidance of litigation;
♦ the establishment since the 1970s of increasingly powerful environmental
ministries in most countries;
♦ formation of bodies like the Institute of Environmental Management (UK);
♦ promotion of the Integrated Systems for Environmental Management and the
Business Charter for Sustainable Development (International Chamber of
Commerce, 1991);
♦ provision of courses on environmental management at university business
schools;
♦ the UN Center on Transnational Corporations has promoted sustainable
development.
31
CHAPTER THREE
Corporate environmental management in the 1990s
Business interacts with a wide range of parties (Figure 3.1). Satisfying the investors
and shareholders is at present the driving force; the adoption of environmental
management implies concern for a wider range of stakeholders: the public, bystanders,
employees, consumers, the regional and global environment. Environmental
management must address its objectives within the context of company practices
(e.g. if at all possible it should not slow completion schedules) (Seldner and Cottrel,
1994). As its value is proven, those practices may be modified to help environmental
management. ‘Company’, ‘firm’ or ‘business’ is used in this chapter, but
environmental management, eco-audit and environmental management systems are
also practised by government departments, city administrations, etc.
The tasks of a business environmental manager include:
♦ education of employees to be aware of environmental issues;
♦ updating management on relevant environmental regulation, laws and issues;
♦ selecting specialists and checking that environmental management tasks
contracted out to consultants have been satisfactorily conducted and are properly
acted upon;
♦ ensuring waste management is satisfactory;
♦ avoiding legal costs, reducing insurance premiums, risk and hazard assessment;
♦ if need be correcting mistakes of the past.
FIGURE 3.1 Corporate environmental management: the parties involved
Sources: Partly based on Royston (1978a:7, Fig. 3); Hunt and Johnson (1995:69, Fig. 4.1)
32
BUSINESS AND LAW
A typical definition of business environmental management would be: ‘efforts
to minimize the negative environmental impact of the firm’s products throughout
their life cycle’ (Klassen and McLaughlin, 1996:119). The range of tasks is so
wide, and involves working with so many people or bodies outside the company,
that ‘environmental co-ordinator’ might be a better term.
If business fails to adopt environmental management in a serious fashion there
will be little progress, for, as Hawken (1993) noted, corporations are Earth’s dominant
institutions—many corporations have earnings in excess of those of most developing
countries, and some command more riches than some developed nations.
Governments are often lobbied and prevailed upon to do what national business,
MNCs or TNCs want. Big business often has better access to information, resources
and skills than poor nations, and may have greater stability for year-to-year planning
than some governments.
For the last ten years there has been an increasing flow of books on
environmental management and sustainable development for business (e.g. Elkington
and Burke, 1989; Davis, 1991; Sadgrove, 1992; Schmidheiny, 1992; Smith, 1992;
Allenby and Richards, 1994; Hutchinson and Hutchinson, 1997). This literature may
be subdivided into:
♦ greening of business (often by sector, e.g. tourism management and
environment);
♦ environmental management for sustainable development of business;
♦ green corporate environmental management;
♦ total quality management/environmental management systems;
♦ eco-audit;
♦ impact assessment, hazard and risk assessment;
♦ green business ethics;
♦ green marketing, labelling, life-cycle assessment;
♦ recycling and waste disposal;
♦ health and safety;
♦ environmentally sound investment and funding;
♦ environmental law and business.
By 1992 the chemical industry in developed countries was spending an
estimated 3 to 4 per cent of its sales income per annum on environment, health and
safety in the USA alone: that constituted about US$10 billion a year (Greeno and
Robinson, 1992:231). Spending is rapidly increasing. With accidents like the Exxon
Valdez costing over US$2 billion it is easy to see why.
Corporate visions of stewardship—a paradigm shift to
environmental management ethics?
‘Fordism’ of the 1920s to 1960s emphasized mass production, mass consumption,
corporate control and resource exploitation (Amin, 1994:2). Since the 1960s various
thinkers, ‘barefoot economists’ and environmentalists have questioned growing
33
CHAPTER THREE
consumerism, i.e. excessive consumption, stimulated through marketing (Elkington
and Hailes, 1988; Adams et al., 1991). The problem is, how will people (consumers)
and business (supplying the consumers) shift to something more supportive of
environmental goals? Hawken (1993) in The Ecology of Commerce argued that free
market capitalism, the economic and social credo of most of the world, must rapidly
shift to a ‘restorative economy’ based on ‘industrial ecology’ (see later this chapter).
Only business, he argued, and no other human institution, has the power to make
adequate changes. Allenby and Richards (1994) also saw industrial ecology as a
means of integrating environmental concern with economic activity.
Whether it is termed post-Fordian, postmodern or post-industrial, what Hawken
and others argue is that the world’s future economy should be organized with guiding
principles coming from industrial ecology. These post-Fordians seem convinced that
the profit motive will be replaced by a more environmentally sensitive approach.
Some even suggest that environmental management values are supplanting
shareholder interests and a paradigm shift is beginning. However, there is a risk that
‘greening’ of business is appearance rather than substance, simply the adoption of
environmental management tools to improve profits and public relations (Garrod
and Chadwick, 1996).
While there might seem to be few incentives at present to encourage a shift to
better environmental management, there have been efforts to promote it (Greeno
and Robertson, 1992:224; Welford, 1996; 1997). One of the more significant moves
has been the publication in 1991 of a Business Charter for Sustainable Development
by the International Chamber of Commerce at the 1991 World Industry Conference
on Environmental Management (see Box 3.1). One of the first questions asked by
business of such proposals is ‘can they improve financial performance as well as
lead to sustainable development?’. Klassen and McLaughlin (1996) put this to the
test, and concluded from studies of firms’ performances that the adoption of
environmental management did increase profits.
Approaches adopted to promote environmental management in
business
Klassen and McLaughlin (1996) noted: ‘the long-term goal of environmental
management is to move toward…considering environmental aspects in an integrated
fashion in product design, the entire manufacturing process, marketing, product
delivery and use, consumer service, and post-consumer product disposition.’ Already,
several fields are well developed, including: industrial ecology, green marketing,
consumer protection bodies, ecolabelling, total quality management, covenants,
lifecycle analysis.
34
BUSINESS AND LAW
BOX 3.1 Business Charter for Sustainable Development: principles
for environmental management
1 Corporate priority To recognize environmental management as among the
highest corporate priorities and as a key determinant to sustainable development;
to establish policies, programmes and practices for conducting operations in
an environmentally sound manner.
2 Integrated management To integrate these policies, programmes and practices
fully into each business as an essential element of management in all its functions.
3 Process of improvement To continue to improve corporate policies,
programmes and environmental performance, taking into account technical
developments, scientific understanding, consumer needs and community
expectations, with legal regulations as a starting-point; and to apply the same
environmental criteria internationally.
4 Employee education To educate, train and motivate employees to conduct
their activities in an environmentally responsible manner.
5 Prior assessment To assess environmental impacts before starting a new
activity or project, and before decommissioning a facility or leaving a site.
6 Products and services To develop and provide products or services that have
no undue environmental impact and are safe in their intended use, that are
efficient in their consumption of energy and natural resources, and that can be
recycled, reused, or disposed of safely.
7 Customer advice To advise, and where relevant educate, customers, distributors
and the public, in the safe use, transportation, storage and disposal of products
provided; and to apply similar considerations to the provision of services.
8 Facilities and operations To develop, design and operate facilities and
conduct activities, taking into consideration the efficient use of energy
and materials, the sustainable use of renewable resources, the
minimization of adverse environmental impact and waste generation,
and the safe and responsible disposal of residual waste.
9 Research To conduct or support research on the environmental impacts of
raw materials, products, processes, emissions and wastes, associated with the
enterprise, and on the means of minimizing any adverse impacts.
10 Precautionary approach To modify the manufacture, marketing or use of
products or services or the conduct of activities, consistent with scientific and
technical understanding, to prevent serious or irreversible environmental
continued . . .
35
CHAPTER THREE
degradation. The 1991 Second World Industry Conference on Environmental
Management (Rotterdam) promoted the ‘precautionary principle’. One problem
for those proposing a development is how much proof of a risk they need
before taking possibly expensive precautions—what seems to be be widely
followed is to establish whether there is a ‘reasonably foreseeable risk’ or a
‘significant risk’ (Birnie and Boyle, 1992:95–6).
11 Contractors and suppliers To promote the adoption of these principles by
contractors acting on behalf of the enterprise, encouraging and, where
appropriate, requiring improvements in their practices to make them consistent
with those of the enterprise; and to encourage the widest adoption of these
principles by suppliers.
12 Emergency preparedness To develop and maintain, where significant hazards
exist, emergency preparedness plans in conjunction with the emergency
services, relevant authorities and the local community, recognizing potential
transboundary impacts.
13 Transfer of technology To contribute to the transfer of environmentally sound
technology and management methods throughout the industrial and public
sectors.
14 Contributing to the common effort To contribute to the development of
public policy and to business, governmental and intergovernmental programmes
and educational initiatives that will enhance environmental awareness and
protection.
15 Openness of concerns To foster openness and dialogue with employees and
the public, anticipating and responding to their concerns about the potential
hazards and impacts of operations, products, wastes or services, including those
of transboundary or global significance.
16 Compliance and reporting To measure environmental performance; to
conduct regular environmental audits and assessments of compliance with
company requirements, legal requirements, and these principles; and
periodically to provide appropriate information to the Board of Directors,
shareholders, employees, the authorities and the public.
Note: The International Chamber of Commerce established a task-force of
business representatives to create this Business Charter for Sustainable
Development—it was launched in April 1991.
Source: International Chamber of Commerce, 1993
36
BUSINESS AND LAW
Industrial ecology
This is an approach which examines industrial, economic and resource activities
from a biological and environmental, rather than a monetary point of view (Frosch
and Gallopoulos, 1989). Allenby and Richards (1994) saw it as integrating
environmental concern into economic activity. Industrial ecology regards waste and
pollution as uneconomic and harmful, and seeks to ‘dovetail’ them with raw materials.
This means that wherever possible industry should use by-products, and go beyond
the reduction of wastes to make use of what remains by the producer or other bodies.
The product does not cause damage, and leads to a system of commerce where each
and every act is inherently sustainable and restorative (Hawken, 1993:xvi). Effectively,
the environmental price of a product is included in its retail price.
This application of the ecosystem concept to industry means linking the
‘metabolism’ of one company or body to that of others. This is not far-fetched: some
groupings of companies and settlements do it already. For example, Kalundborg
(Denmark) has a coal-fired power station, oil refinery, pharmaceutical companies,
concrete producer, sulphuric acid producer, fish farms, horticultural greenhouses
and district heating—which are well integrated. Kalundborg’s industrial ecology
has happened more or less spontaneously, as companies seek to minimize costs of
energy and raw materials and cut the output of waste. There are a number of similar
examples in Sweden (Hawken, 1993:62) and Denmark, where sewage, agricultural
waste and household refuse disposal are often integrated with district heating and
electricity generation.
Pigouvian taxes
Some people advocate going beyond the sort of industrial ecology-based strategy
adopted by Kalundborg to a fully cyclic economy, i.e. one which yields virtually no
waste because recycling and by-product recovery are complete. Making manufacturers
responsible for some or all of the costs of recycling or waste disposal is one way of
encouraging waste reduction and industrial ecology. There are various ways of doing
this: one is to levy Pigouvian taxes (see chapter 5). Named after the 1920s UK
economist Arthur Pigou, these aim to ensure a manufacturer pays all costs from raw
material and energy provision to final collection and recycling.
Pigouvian taxes may present problems: large companies may make sufficient
profits to afford fines, but small companies could be crippled. So, the ‘polluter-pays’
principle can be a virtual licence to pollute if the fines are not set high enough, and
that can damage small businesses (Beaumont, 1992). One way of avoiding such
problems is to use licences; for example, in Germany manufacturers pay a fee to the
government to display a green dot on packaging which authorizes (compulsory)
recycling. As the costs have to be passed on to the customer, this encourages companies
to reduce expensive packaging and use cheap, recyclable materials.
37
CHAPTER THREE
Green marketing
Some companies and public bodies had recognized by the early 1980s that a
satisfactory green image could improve public relations, and perhaps provide a
marketing niche (Charter, 1992; Coddington, 1993; Peattie, 1995). There are
manufacturers that have gained from this, and offer genuinely improved
products— e.g. refrigerators that use less electricity, do not leak CFCs, and which
are easier to recycle, and firms which manufacture equipment for monitoring
and managing environmental quality. Less enlightened companies may sell goods
because of public fears about the environment—e.g. sunblock creams and
sunglasses for those afraid of increased UV. AEG reputedly increased sales by
ca. 30 per cent in a static market by running a marketing campaign on its green
strengths. In America in the 1980s McDonald’s commissioned an environmental
audit and acted on it to shift from plastic packaging foamed with CFCs to
environmentally friendly cardboard. This proved good for public relations and
was much cheaper (Elkington and Hailes, 1988).
Consumer protection bodies
Alongside the growth in green marketing there has been a spread of green
consumerism (The Council of Economic Priorities of the United States, 1989; Mintel,
1990; Irvine, 1989). Consumer protection bodies have been active since the 1960s,
and have not been restricted to the developed countries, e.g. one Malaysian body has
been active in its own country and works for consumers elsewhere—the Consumers
Association Penang.
Ecolabelling
The marking of goods to indicate that they are environmentally friendly (ecolabelling)
has been adopted in many countries, including Canada, the USA, Germany and
Sweden (Figure 3.2). In most cases the product is judged against similar goods by an
independent agency to establish whether it has less environmental impact (without
formal eco-auditing). Germany was one of the first countries to introduce ecolabelling
in 1978, with its Umweltzeichen or Blaue Engel system (Hemmelskamp and
Brockmann, 1997). This relies on a jury of experts supervised by the Federal
Environment Ministry to award the right to display a mark on packaging or in adverts.
This is a way of influencing the behaviour of consumers, helping them identify the
environmental impacts of products, and encourages manufacturers to reduce the
impacts of their products.
Ecolabelling assesses environmental impact and communicates this to the
consumer or middle merchant. The focus is on the product and often nothing is
said about the process of production or distribution. So, an ‘environmentally
friendly’ product might come from a factory which causes pollution or present a
disposal problem after use. There is also a need for standardization and policing of
ecolabelling.
38
BUSINESS AND LAW
FIGURE 3.2 Ecolabelling
Note: Date of introduction in parenthesis
39
CHAPTER THREE
However, under current World Trade Organization (WTO) rules this may not be
easy. West (1995) warned that without better legal enforcement, it tended to become
a marketing gimmick.
Total quality management and environmental management systems
(Environmental management systems and eco-audit are further discussed in
chapter 4.)
Total quality management (TQM) (also called company-wide quality
management) aims to provide assurance of adherence to policy and specifications
through a structured management system, and to enable demonstration of it to third
parties through documentation and record-keeping. TQM was first formulated in the
USA, and largely developed in Japan in the early post-war period to try to improve
industrial competitiveness. Environmental management systems (EMSs) show
adherence to a suitable environmental policy, the meeting of appropriate
environmental objectives (equivalent to specifications in quality management) and
the ability to demonstrate to a wide range of interested parties (‘customers’ in TQM)
that the system requirements and objectives are met. EMSs, usually require that a
company or body publishes and regularly updates an Environmental Policy Statement.
An EMS provides an organizational structure, procedures and resources for
implementing environmental policy. It also provides a language of performance and
quality that can be understood by management (Willig, 1994; British Standards
Institution, 1996). So far, adoption of EMS has mainly been voluntary with rapid
growth of interest and continuing modification and improvement. Hunt and Johnson
(1995:4) suggested this indicates business has shifted from ‘defensive environmental
management’ to accepting the need for probity.
There are critics of EMSs, who argue it is possible to rig them by setting easy-
to-achieve targets; that it is more important (and difficult) to nurture satisfactory
environmental ethics; and that EMS is still being developed and tested (for a critique
see: Welford, 1996:52).
Covenants
A government or other regulatory body can provide companies with a more stable
regulatory environment and encourage development of better pollution control plans
or adoption of an EMS (Beardsley et al., 1997:33) through a covenant. This is a
written, voluntary agreement signed by the company or other body and the
government or agency seeking regulation. The Netherlands has made extensive use
of covenants as part of an integrated approach to national environmental management
policy. A Dutch company undertaking a covenant would be expected to produce a
development plan every four years, to be reviewed by local authorizing bodies. The
plan coverage includes pollution control and energy conservation and it is seen as a
way of getting national policies implemented at local level. Measures were initiated
by the National Environmental Policy Plans (adopted by the Dutch Parliament in
40
BUSINESS AND LAW
1989), and by 1997 over 1,200 companies had signed covenants. The covenanting
approach can be quite effective, particularly in cutting pollution. However, some
NGOs are not keen on the approach, viewing it as closed or cosy and not sufficiently
open to third parties to check. There are also some worries that it may lead to a
softening of enforcement controls. Nevertheless, it is an approach which encourages
company self-regulation.
Life-cycle analysis
Many development activities are processes which have different stages—for example,
manufacturing a car or running a power station involve raw materials and energy
provision, plant construction, manufacturing, distribution, use and disposal or
decommissioning. Equipment is usually subject to wear and tear, and so varies in
performance and presents different risks as it ages and as management acquire
experience (or become complacent). Industrial and power generation sites, for
example, often accumulate contamination, and so the environmental threat is not
constant. It is therefore undesirable to assess impacts or develop environmental
management policies by simply taking a snapshot view. Life-cycle analysis (or
assessment) has been developed to try to consider the whole of an activity, which
may extend beyond the time horizon of a single owner. It is cradle-to-grave study of
an activity or company (British Standards Institution, 1994a; Fava, 1994; Pidgeon
and Brown, 1994; Franklin, 1995).
Environmental management and business: the current situation
One may summarize the present situation (see Beaumont, 1992:202) as:
♦ the majority of businesses are aware that environmental issues are important;
♦ some businesses are doing something—it may be from genuine concern, but
often it is for public relations or profit motives;
♦ too often businesses adopt a ‘react and repair’ approach, rather than following
precautionary principles;
♦ only a few businesses are acting at a strategic level;
♦ business is in need of strategies like industrial ecology, but will need to be
encouraged or forced to adopt them.
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT AND LAW
Law should provide a framework for regulating use of the environment (Harte, 1992;
McEldowney, 1996; Bell, 1997) (Box 3.2). Law is crucial for environmental
management in a number of ways, aiding:
41
CHAPTER THREE
♦ regulation of resource use;
♦ protection of the environment and biodiversity;
♦ mediation, conflict resolution and conciliation;
♦ formulation of stable, unambiguous undertakings and agreements.
Environmental management may involve a number of resource situations, e.g.
individually-owned (private) resources; national resources; shared resources; open-
access resources; common property resources; global resources. Some of these are
better covered by law than others (Berkes, 1989; The Ecologist, 1993). There are
different legal systems—for example, based on Roman Law, on customary laws,
Islamic Law, the Code Napoléon—to name but a few. Some countries have legal
systems that combine more than one of these, say indigenous and colonial era
legislation, plus Islamic Law. Areas may be subject to state and federal laws and to
secular and religious laws. In most countries statutory law is written by politicians
and passed by national legislature; and common law is compiled by judges (with
reference to past cases and prior statutory law).
Most legislation evolves in response to problems, so there is often delay between
need and the establishment of satisfactory law. Without effective legislation, resource
use, pollution control, conservation, and most fields of human activity are likely to
fall into chaos and conflict. Law can encourage satisfactory performance, enable
authorities to punish those who infringe environmental management legislation, or
confiscate equipment that is misused or faulty, or close a company; it may also be
possible for employees, bystanders and product or service users to sue for damages
if they are harmed.
Some countries have been active in developing environmental management
law, notably Sweden, The Netherlands, the USA, Canada, Australia and New Zealand.
Some environmental laws are ancient: Indian rulers promulgated controls on hunting
and forest felling centuries ago; the UK had local pollution control laws as early as
the twelfth century AD, and passed nationally enforced pollution control legislation
like the Alkali Act (1863) over a century ago.
Environmental management increasingly involves transboundary problems that
reach beyond traditional sovereignty limits, issues of negligence, and the need for
nations to co-operate. International law is evolving to address such issues, although
it is difficult to develop and enforce (McAuslan, 1991). Often powerful MNCs or
TNCs are involved in issues and these may prompt and drive forward innovation,
not necessarily to the benefit of the environment or the public. Walker (1989: 30)
likened them to seventeenth-century city states that had insufficient public
accountability. The problem is to ensure that changes are for the good of the
environment and the greater common good, rather than just suiting a large company
or more countries.
Most laws, whether civil or criminal, are corrective—punishing wrong-doers
and deterring others from infringing rules and agreements or from causing nuisance
or injury. In the main, therefore, legislation has not been very pre-emptive.
Environmental managers must also be aware that there is little point in passing laws
or making international agreements if there cannot be adequate enforcement.
42
BUSINESS AND LAW
BOX 3.2 Forms of regulation or legislation (principles, standards,
guidelines, etc., which are not firm laws, but help lawmakers.
Definitions are not rigidly fixed.)
Principle broadly, a step towards establishing a law. Once established, tested
and working, it can be incorporated into law.
Standard levels of pollution, energy efficiency, etc., that are desirable or
required. They provide a benchmark so that different individuals, bodies,
countries, are as far as possible dealing with the same values. A treaty may
incorporate standards.
Guideline suggestions as to how to proceed, usually without real force of law.
Directive documents that set out a desired outcome, but to some extent leave
the ways of reaching it to companies, states or countries.
Licence a right granted to a body, which agrees to terms or pays, which requires
adherence to strict practice and does not give any guarantee of permanent
ownership or usufruct.
Law laws and statutes that require certain actions or standards, and may punish
failure to achieve them.
Treaty a solemn binding agreement between international entities—especially states.
Treaties can lay down rules or treaty constraints. Stricter, more precise treaties are
likely to involve fewer states, and the process of drafting, adopting and ratifying
means that this can be a slow process, and environmental management often needs
rapid action. Vague treaties are quicker and easier to get signed. Few multilateral
treaties are adopted in less than five years: the UN Law of the Sea Convention took
nine years (1973–1982), and some take much more. Treaties can be difficult to
enforce—often enforcement is attempted by an international organization: e.g. the
International Whaling Commission. Treaties should bind states that sign and ratify
them to accept terms as customary law, but in practice they do not always get
transformed into customary law, and some are largely ignored.
Declaration a general statement of intent or drafting of guidelines to follow.
‘Softer’ than the obligations of a treaty.
Convention multilateral instrument signed by many states or international
institutions. Conventions can be vague, which ensures that countries are not
afraid of signing but this can undermine effectiveness.
Protocol less formal agreement, often subsidiary or ancillary to a convention.
Contingency agreement a good way of dealing with uncertainty surrounding
many global environmental management issues. Agreement of what to do if
something happens.
43
CHAPTER THREE
Three things are especially important for environmental legislation:
1 The precautionary principle, which has evolved to deal with risks and uncertainties
faced by environmental management (Rogers et al., 1997). The meaning is still
not firmly established by law. The principle implies that an ounce of prevention
is worth a pound of cure—it does not prevent problems but may reduce their
occurrence and helps ensure contingency plans are made (Mitchell, 1997:80).
The application of this principle requires either cautious progress until a
development can be judged ‘innocent’, or avoiding development until research
indicates exactly what the risks are, and then proceeding to minimize them. Once
a threat is identified, action should be taken to prevent or control damage even if
there is uncertainty about whether the threat is real. Some environmental problems
become impossible or costly to solve if there is delay, so waiting for research
and legal proof is not costless. Some hold that the principle should be applied in
situations where both the probability and cost of impacts are unknown. The
principle was stressed in many of the decisions reached at the Rio Earth Summit
in 1992. For example, it was endorsed by Article 15 of the 1992 Rio Declaration
on Environment and Development (Freestone, 1994:209–211). Article 130r of
the Maastricht Treaty (Treaty on European Union) of February 1992 states that
EU policy on the environment shall be based on the precautionary principle.
2 The polluter-pays principle—in addition to the obvious—the polluter pays for
damage caused by a development—this principle also implies that a polluter
pays for monitoring and policing. A problem with this approach is that fines
may bankrupt small businesses, yet be low enough for a large company to
write them off as an occasional overhead, which does little for pollution control.
There is debate as to whether the principle should be retrospective—e.g. today
a purchaser who acquires contaminated land in good faith is often forced to
clean up the mess others left (if the polluter pays, how long back does liability
stretch?). Developing countries are seeking to have developed countries pay
more for carbon dioxide controls, arguing that they polluted the world during
the Industrial Revolution, yet enjoy the fruits of invention from that era. The
polluter-pays principle is more a way of allocating costs to the polluter than a
legal principle. OECD member countries adopted the principle in 1972, at
least in theory (OECD, 1975).
3 Freedom of information—if the public, NGOs (‘green watchdogs’) or even
official bodies are unable to get information, environmental planning and
management is hindered. Democracies have begun to release more
information—the USA has a Freedom of Information Act, the EU is moving
in that direction, and in the UK the (1994) Environmental Protection Act has
helped. Few countries have such well-developed disclosure as the USA, which
requires public registers of development activities, publication of Environmental
Impact Statements, hazard warning on products, etc. Some governments and
multinational corporations fear industrial secrets will leak to competitors if
there is too much disclosure, and there are situations where authorities declare
‘strategic’ needs and suspend disclosure.
44
BUSINESS AND LAW
In many countries, court actions, even if they were fought in the public interest,
had to be brought by an individual, who, if they lost, paid costs. This acted as a
deterrent for anyone to tackle government or large company wrongdoings, because
they lacked equivalent resources. It is desirable that NGOs and individuals be allowed
to bring legal actions to protect the environment, if need be as group cases (class
actions). In the USA the Environmental Defense Fund, the Sierra Club, and
environmental lawyers like Joseph Sax managed to achieve the right to bring class
actions (or group actions) in the 1970s. Subsequently Canada, the UK and several
other countries saw similar legal changes.
The 1969 US National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) —
‘environmental Magna Carta’?
Discussions leading to NEPA began in the early 1960s, when the need was perceived
for the USA to have a basic declaration of national environmental policy and an
action-forcing provision. The US Government was largely reacting to public opinion
that conventional planning did not adequately take account of the environment; it
already had responsibility to steward resources and protect the environment under
the Public Trust Doctrine. However, before NEPA the USA had little effective federal
control over the environment and lacked land use regulations which some other
countries had. NEPA was signed into US Law on 1 January 1970, to reform federal
policy-making, and influence the private sector to reorientate values (Barrow,
1997:168). Originally it was intended that NEPA would change the nature of federal
decision-making. However, it has become more of a procedural requirement. Caldwell
(1989) —one of the architects of NEPA—felt that, had it not happened in the USA,
something similar would have appeared elsewhere.
NEPA required environmental impact assessment (EIA) prior to federally
funded projects that might ‘significantly’ affect the environment—a message to
officials to ‘look before you leap’. NEPA Section 101 set regulations to protect the
environment, Section 102 (2) (c) ensured they were pursued, and Section 103 included
provision for EIA statements to be challenged in court. That happened a lot at first
because NEPA was untested and used expressions like ‘significant’ and ‘human
environment’ that were poorly defined. There was also some need to clarify which
developments required EIA, and how and by whom it was to be conducted.
Virtually the world’s first use of the expression ‘EIA’ occurs in Section 102
(2) c of NEPA, which requires US federal agencies to prepare an environmental
impact statement (EIS) (bearing the costs against taxes, and sending copies to federal
and state agencies and to the public) using EIA, prior to taking action.
There were three main elements in NEPA:
1 NEPA announced a US national policy for the environment.
2 It outlined procedures for achieving the objectives of that policy.
3 Provision was made for the establishment of a US Council on Environmental
Quality (CEQ) which was to advise the US President on the environment,
45
CHAPTER THREE
review the EIA process, review draft EISs, and see NEPA was followed. Also in
1970 the US Government created the US Environmental Protection Agency
(EPA), its brief to co-ordinate the attack on environmental pollution and to be
responsible for the EIA process (the EPA is in effect ‘overseer’ of impact as-
sessment in the USA).
NEPA was the first time US Law had really allowed for development to be
delayed or abandoned for the long-term good of the environment, and for efforts to
be made to co-ordinate public, state, federal and local activities. Effectively, NEPA
put environmental quality on a level with economic growth, a revolution in values in
a country where state intrusion was anathema—for this reason many see it as a sort
of Magna Carta, although it stopped short of making a healthy environment a
Constitutional Right. Public participation is written into NEPA to the extent it might
be described as a corner-stone.
NEPA is statutory law: it was written after deliberation, and did not evolve from
custom, practice or tradition. Consequently, like a charter, it was imperfect; there were
problems, especially delay, as litigation took place over various issues. Many felt NEPA
had been abducted by lawyers and could become a bureaucratic delaying tactic. These
teething problems have largely been resolved, although some feel NEPA should be
strengthened, possibly leading to changes in the US Constitution to better manage the
environment (Caldwell, 1989). NEPA has been a seminal concept and catalyst for EIA
in other countries, although bodies like the Canadian Environmental Assessment
Research Council and the International Association for Impact Analysis also deserve
credit for spreading and developing mandatory development review processes.
Effective implementation of EIA demands legislation and law enforcement to
ensure that:
♦ there are no loopholes, so that no activity likely to cause impacts escapes EIA;
♦ the assessment is adequate;
♦ the assessment is heeded;
♦ the public are kept sufficiently informed or, ideally, involved in assessment.
European law and environmental management
The European Community (EC) grew from the six original states which signed the
Treaty of Rome in 1957 to form a closer European Union of 15 nations in 1995
which is set to expand further in the future. EU members like Sweden and The
Netherlands have long-established traditions of environmental concern; others have
given the environment far less attention. Growing EU integration should prompt and
support better policies more widely. It will also ensure common rules and ways of
monitoring, setting standards, etc. In 1992 the EU established a European
Environmental Agency as a clearing-house for environmental information. Its role is
also to evaluate and disseminate information and develop means for applying the
precautionary principle, but not enforcement of environmental policy.
46
BUSINESS AND LAW
The Council of Europe (established 1949) had 35 EU and other member states
in 1995 (many former colonies, trading partners, etc.), and is active in advocacy,
cultural relations and raising awareness of issues including conservation and
environmental protection. A UN agency that acts as a pan-European forum is the UN
Commission for Europe (UNECE), which supports sustainable development,
environmental research, and has launched or serviced several agreements dealing
with issues like pollution (e.g. the 1992 Convention on Transboundary Effects of
Industrial Accidents) (Hewett, 1995). Environmental legislation is an important part
of the emerging pan-European legal system (with the European Court of Justice as
an overall arbitrator). The European Environmental Agency has not got as much
enforcement power as the US Environmental Protection Agency, and serves mainly
to gather information on the state of the European environment. The EU has also
established a European Environmental Information and Observation Network; a
European Economic Community (EEC) Directive on Environmental Impact
Assessment (Directive 85/337) —which requires environmental assessment to be
undertaken by developers; an EEC Directive on Freedom of Access to Information
on the Environment (Directive 90/313/EEC) —which requires authorities to ensure
public access to relevant environmental information; and an EC Regulation on Eco-
Management and Auditing (EMAS) (Regulation 1836/93).
One could make the broad generalization that EU environmental law has focused
on co-ordination, codification and integration (Ball and Bell, 1991; Vaughn, 1991;
Lister, 1996). Since about 1973 there has been more interest in integrating wider
environmental issues into politics alongside concern for achieving economic growth.
In 1985 the European Commission decided environmental protection should be an
integral part of economic and social policies at macroeconomic level and by sector.
This was incorporated into the Treaty of Rome in 1987 (Article 130r) and was
strengthened by the Maastrict Treaty (1993), which included a statement of concern
for sustainable growth (Winter, 1996:7, 271). EU legislation seems to be increasingly
aligning itself with global conventions such as those relating to global warming or
waste management. Since 1993 EU law has been enacted to support more freedom
of environmental information, better standard setting, the precautionary principle,
and the polluter-pays principle; Winter (1996:277) has listed the core objectives:
♦ preserve, protect and improve the quality of the environment.
♦ protect human health.
♦ prudent and rational use of natural resources.
♦ promote measures at international level to deal with regional or world-
wide environmental problems.
Hughes (1992:86) has noted that environmental management law should be
‘vertically integrated’ between regional, national and international systems. The EEC
system allows this to some extent. Efforts to develop an overall EEC environmental
policy resulted in the publication in 1973 of the First Programme of Action on the
Environment; the Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth Action Programmes appeared in
1977, 1983, 1987, 1992 (reviewed in 1995), and lay down principles that EEC
47
CHAPTER THREE
environmental legislation should adhere to (Hughes, 1992:89). The Fifth Programme
of Action on the European Environment seeks to incorporate good environmental
policy into all Community policies (CEC, 1992). In the UK the 1995 Environment
Act created a powerful, wide-ranging Environmental Agency for England and Wales
(also a Scottish Environmental Protection Agency), which brought together the
functions previously spread among many agencies (pollution control, fisheries
management, flood defence, etc.) (Lane and Peto, 1995).
International law and environmental management
International law governs relations between states, and has no direct effect on domestic
law or individuals. It is often difficult to force a sovereign state to sign, and then
honour, a treaty or similar agreement. International law must thus depend a great
deal on voluntary agreements by governments and international bodies (the Brussels
and Lugano Conventions on Environmental Law cover this issue of ensuring
compliance) (Székely, 1990a; 1990b). When negotiation fails a possibility is to refer
the case to the International Court of Justice (The Hague) (not a very friendly process),
or set up an International Joint Commission. International law has tended to be laissez-
faire and ad hoc (Birnie and Boyle, 1992).
From the mid-nineteenth century until the 1950s co-operation, exchange of
information, agreement and international guidelines or rules were often initiated by
international public unions, e.g. the International Postal Union, or the International
Telegraphic Union. Nowadays, the UN and its 15 specialist agencies (the FAO, WHO,
UNESCO, UNEP, etc.) often initiate the development of international environmental
law. For example, the UNEP has published guidelines on principles of conduct over
shared natural resources (1978) and, more recently, on exchange of information on
chemicals in international trade. NGOs like Greenpeace, Friends of the Earth and
the World-Wide Fund for Nature also lobby for environmental legislation.
Various observers note the UN-supported system of environmental treaty
making is valuable, although it needs strengthening—e.g. the UN General Assembly
can only recommend, not insist that law be made. Developing countries have
complained that international law is too US- or Eurocentric and there is a wish in
some countries to see more application of Islamic Law. Since the 1972 UN Conference
on the Human Environment (Stockholm), most of the UN-prompted multilateral
treaties have been developed by a two-step process: a relatively vague framework
convention which acknowledges a problem is presented (most countries are happy
to sign such a non-binding agreement); that step prompts action, especially data
collection, discussion and propaganda, which reduces opposition and raises interest
so that a protocol can be introduced and agreed to (Susskind, 1992:67).
International law faces a number of challenges. One of the greatest is the
management of ‘global commons’: oceans and their resources; world weather and
climate; atmosphere; stratospheric ozone; space, etc. (Cleveland, 1990). Many
resources, and also pests, migrate or move, so that effective management of ocean
fisheries, migratory fish in rivers, whaling, disease or locust control, etc., needs to be
through multilateral agreement.
48
BUSINESS AND LAW
In the late 1970s a class action by an NGO forced the US Agency for
International Development (USAID) to insist on pre-development environmental
assessments before granting funds. In effect the precautionary principle embodied
in NEPA was extended to the Third World with respect to aid. Within a few years
most aid agencies had adopted environmental guidelines and rules (Wirth, 1986).
The end of the Cold War may mean more opportunities and resources for international
environmental law to develop (Walker, 1989).
Indigenous peoples and environmental law
IUCN (1997:27) estimates suggest there are over 250 million indigenous peoples
who interact with environmental law with respect to:
1 protection of natural environment together with indigenous people;
2 rights of indigenous people over natural resources;
3 rights over traditional knowledge—e.g. to prevent ethnobotany becoming
‘biopiracy’ (gathering indigenous knowledge which is patented and sold);
4 damages to indigenous people for past environmental wrongs by ‘outsiders’;
5 views of indigenous people which could be fed into environmental law making.
Indigenous people often retain knowledge, skills and beliefs that relate closely to the
natural environment. The protection of the environment is often vital to their physical
and cultural survival, and they have insight which may aid environmental management
and law making.
The rights of indigenous peoples are recognized by the UN Commission on
Economic Development (UNCED) 1992 Convention on Biological Diversity and by
the 1994 Draft UN Declaration of the Rights of Indigenous Peoples. Nevertheless,
indigenous people often still have no written land tenure, making them vulnerable to
abuse or resettlement if there are natural resources to be exploited.
In recent decades several countries have made changes to improve indigenous
peoples’ control of their environment and natural resources (see chapter 8). Whether
this will lead to better environmental management is debated. In Australia, New
Zealand, the USA, Canada and Amazonian Brazil aboriginal people have fought for
their sovereign rights to control and manage, or at least share in, resources (Dale,
1992; Shutkin, 1991). In Australia debate about aboriginal territorial rights has become
heated recently. The Australian High Court has ruled that Australia’s indigenous
people enjoy native title and access rights to land leased by Euro-Australian farmers,
which means two land-users should legally coexist. An Aboriginal claim to coastal
waters and the Great Barrier Reef, if awarded, would have considerable impact on
fishing and coastal resorts (The Times (UK), 30 December 1997:11).
A question increasingly asked is: who should bear the cost of rehabilitation
after resources exploitation? For example, the Pacific island of Nauru, now
independent, provided phosphates for some 90 years. Does it have any claim on past
colonial powers to remedy damage? Nauru claimed through the International Court
of Justice for damage done before its independence in 1967 (Anderson, 1992). Similar
49
CHAPTER THREE
retrospective actions have arisen in Australia and in other Pacific islands, over nuclear
weapons test sites, and in Papua New Guinea concerning mining.
The 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development
Sometimes referred to as the ‘Earth Summit’ or abbreviated to UNCED, held in
1992 the Rio Conference was a test of the ability of the international political and
legal order to reach a consensus for the good of the whole world (Tromans, 1992;
Grubb et al., 1993). Originally there were hopes that UNCED would agree an Earth
Charter, but this was not achieved, although several new declarations were made and
conventions were established (see Box 3.3) (Freestone, 1994; Johnson, 1993).
Freestone (1994) reviewed the implications of UNCED, stressing that it did crystallize
principles which contribute to the development of international environmental law.
However, some feel the Earth Summit tended to weaken international environmental
law by focusing on development issues (see Sands, 1993). A follow-up meeting to
UNCED, the Rio II Conference was held in New York in 1997 (see chapter 14).
BOX 3.3 Agreements made at the Earth Summit, 1992
♦ Rio Declaration on Environment and Development updated version of the
Stockholm Declaration (of 1972); published general principles for future
international action on environment and development.
♦ Framework Convention on Climate Change framework for negotiation of
detailed protocols to deal with control of greenhouse gas emissions,
deforestation, sea-level change, etc.
♦ Convention on Biological Diversity intended to arrest alarming rate of species
loss (criticized for having been poorly and hurriedly drafted).
♦ Declaration on Forests a principle, not legally binding, this was substituted
for original idea of a Forest Convention.
♦ Agenda 21 an action plan for the rest of the century and framework for
dealing with environment and development issues. Consists of 40 chapters
(not a legally binding instrument).
♦ Global Environmental Facility a fund established for global problem-solving.
Under the auspices of the World Bank, UNEP and UNDP. Designed to be
‘democratic and transparent’ and helpful to poor nations. Amongst other
things, intended to support Biodiversity and Climate Change Conventions.
International law and sovereignty issues
Sovereignty affects access to data and monitoring, and can be a major constraint on
environmental management. Countries are usually reluctant to sign any agreement
which affects their sovereign powers. Yet growing transboundary and global
50
BUSINESS AND LAW
environmental problems make it important to get co-operation. There are transnational
and multinational corporations sufficiently powerful to threaten and bribe their way
around sovereignty and other controls. Terrorism can have transnational or global
impact, so there should be better international controls and co-operation to counter
it. Unfortunately for many environmental management issues, getting multi-state
agreements is a slow process.
In 1977 the Stockholm Declaration on the Human Environment affirmed the
sovereign right of states to exploit their own resources and their responsibility to
ensure that activities within their jurisdiction or control do not cause damage to the
environment beyond the limits of their national jurisdiction (Stockholm Principle
21). This affirmation has had considerable influence on subsequent international
environmental law making (Birnie and Boyle, 1992:90).
International trade agreements, notably the GATT/WTO provisions (see chapter
5), mean that if a country has environmental protection laws, say controlling the
import of pesticide-contaminated produce, timber cut in an environmentally unsound
fashion, or fish caught using nets that kill dolphins, these measures may be
unenforceable because they impair ‘free trade’ (Sinner, 1994). The level playing
field demanded by trade agreements may make it difficult to control importation of
food and commodities produced by means of genetic engineering and growth- or
lactation-enhancing hormones. Conversely, there may be situations where
globalization helps countries adopt and enforce better standards (care must be taken
to ensure that the motive is to improve environmental quality and not an attempt to
make production costs uniform or create a global market for standardized products
that enjoy economies of scale). Globalization of patent rights has generated concern;
MNCs and TNCs seek to recoup research costs and control markets; poor countries
fear bio-piracy with corporations patenting and claiming intellectual rights on genetic
resources and ideas derived from such resources. The patenting and control of sales
of crop seeds (modern varieties) and pharmaceutical products has also caused much
friction.
Protection and extension of sovereignty can lead to wars; testing and storage
of weapons; and territorial claims. These affect the environment and need to be more
firmly addressed by international agreements and law (Shaw, 1993). The pollution
associated with the Gulf War underlines the importance of negotiation. Hostile
environmental modification is covered by the 1977 Environmental Modification
Convention (invoked to hold Iran to reparations for damage to Kuwait), and there
are controls on nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
Box 3.4 presents some of the treaties and agreements relevant to environmental
management (it is not complete but a selection). A number of trends are apparent
here. There has been a move towards the precautionary principle—since about 1972
countries have been guided to try to prevent pollution accidents and misdemeanours.
Obtaining damages for, or penalizing, transnational pollution has been patchy, e.g.
there were no adjudications over Chernobyl, Amoco Cadiz and many similar disasters.
There has been little progress in establishing ‘environmental rights’ (i.e. rights of
natural objects or organisms), although in some western countries there is a vociferous
animal rights lobby. Various agreements and conventions have reaffirmed and
51
CHAPTER THREE
BOX 3.4 A selection of treaties, agreements, etc., relating to
environmental management
Internationally shared resources
In 1972 the USA and Canada signed the Great Lakes Transboundary Agreement
for the comprehensive management of the water quality of the Great Lakes.
Protection of endangered species
1946 International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling. 1973 Convention
on International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES). 1979 Bern Convention
on the Conservation of European Wildlife.
Protection of environmentally important areas
There are many areas agreed by scientists, social scientists and other specialists
to be in need of formal protection. Protection may be supported by a state;
privately funded by a group or individual; or by an international body or bodies.
For example, there is a worldwide scatter of Biosphere Reserves; the UK has
state-protected Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs); many countries have
reserves and national parks. Some conservation areas are established and
watched over by international treaty—the 1971 Ramsar Convention
(Convention on Wetlands of International Importance) provides a framework
for protection of wetland habitats, especially those used by migrating birds.
The UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) supports
and oversees many sites of special cultural value.
The Antarctic
In Antarctica territorial claims have been put aside (but not eliminated) under
the Antarctic Treaty which came into force in 1960 (signed 1959)
(Theutenberg, 1984) (see Figure 3.3). Basically this is an international treaty
by which signatories have agreed to keep Antarctica and its surrounding seas
open for scientific research by all nations deemed to be pursuing scientific
exploration south of 60°S. The treaty requires demilitarization, no nuclear
weapons and a commitment to conservation (Triggs, 1988; Holdgate, 1990).
(For a review of Antarctic law see Auburn, 1982; Beck, 1986.)
While it has been quite a flexible treaty, modified as need arose, it has
been put under some pressure as interest in resource development (notably oil,
minerals, krill, squid and fish) comes into conflict with its conservation
requirements. There are also demands from non-treaty nations (basically those
which have not maintained a significant research presence there) and some
NGOs for there to be changes to give the whole world (probably through the
UN), not just signatory nations, control of Antarctica (a coalition of over 200
NGOs and non-treaty nations—the Atlantic and Southern Ocean Coalition—
has been seeking such a goal). There have been some moves which in theory
could allow mineral resources to be used—the 1988 Convention on the
52
BUSINESS AND LAW
FIGURE 3.3 The Antarctic: (a) territorial claims; (b) possible economic zones to 200 nautical
miles, and limit of Antarctic Treaty (60°S lat)
continued . . .
53
CHAPTER THREE
Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities allows exploitation only
if very stringent environmental assessments are made and accepted by treaty
nations. The Falklands conflict is a warning that if potentially attractive mineral
resources are identified territorial claims may reappear in Antarctica.
Transboundary pollution
In 1965 Canada and the USA became involved in the Trail Smelter pollution
case. The outcome was acceptance that no state has the right to permit use of
its territory in such a way as to injure another territory. The 1972 UN
Conference on the Human Environment in Stockholm was in part called for
by Sweden, because of concern about acid deposition generated by other
countries. In 1979 the Geneva Convention on Long-Range Transboundary
Air Pollution addressed the problem of transboundary sulphur dioxide
atmospheric emissions, but did not lay down firm rules. By the late 1980s
the resolution of transboundary impacts had become an increasingly active
field of diplomacy (Carroll, 1988). The 1991 UN Economic Commission for
Europe Convention on Environmental Impact Assessment in a Transboundary
Context obliged signatory states to act to control transboundary environmental
impacts from proposed activities.
Controls on global warming
The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (signed at UNCED
1992) obliged signatories to stabilize CO emissions at 1990 levels by AD
2000. The 1997 Kyoto Conference was i2ntended to settle details of CO
reduction and to see that targets were enforced by international law2.
However, a coalition of USA industries was opposed to any limit on
greenhouse gas emissions, and lobbied to hinder agreements. Finally
agreements were made by the EU to make an 8 per cent cut in emissions by
AD 2010 and arrangements for Tradeable Emissions Quotas (TEQs) were
approved (with Russia able to sell its unused quotas to the USA) (see chapter
12 for discussion of TEQs).
Ozone damage controls
Efforts to phase out and if possible ban the use of CFCs were made at the 1985
Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer. The 1987 Montreal
Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer—revised 1990—derives
from the Vienna Convention. The protocol aimed for a 50 per cent cut in CFCs
over a short period (24, mainly developed nations signed—by 1994 this had
increased to 74, including some developing countries) and was signed in the
face of considerable uncertainty about ozone damage. The protocol is a
landmark, in that for the first time nations agreed to impose significant costs
on their economies in order to protect the global environment. India and China
held out, seeking agreement for funding to assist with ozone controls.
54
BUSINESS AND LAW
The Law of the Sea
In 1954 the International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships
was undertaken to try to reduce the discharge of waste oil from oil-tankers and
other ship-related discharges (with limited success). For ocean pollution control
to be effective, agreements that cover rivers, effluent outfalls, air pollution,
etc. are required, because pollutants arrive in the sea from such sources (Boyle,
1992). In 1958 the First Conference on Law of the Sea took place (the second
was in 1960), and in 1959 the UN established the International Maritime
Organization to deal with marine safety, law, pollution control, etc.
From the early 1970s some of the nations with coastlines began to
declare extensions of their territorial waters from the accepted 3 to 12, or
even 200 nautical miles. The 1950 Continental Shelf Convention was largely
behind this trend towards extension of exclusive sovereign rights to
continental shelf or seabed resources. To try to formalize these trends the
Third Conference on Law of the Sea was held in 1974.
The UNEP’s Regional Seas Programme has brought together coastal
states of a number of marine regions, resulting in several Regional Seas
Treaties, covering: the Mediterranean; the Gulf; West Africa; Southeast
Pacific; Red Sea; Caribbean; East Africa; and the South Pacific. These treaties
led to the development of Environmental Action Plans and then co-ordination
to fight pollution, etc. In 1977 the North Sea ceased to be ‘high seas’ as far
as fish and mineral exploitation were concerned, when the EC established
zones laying claim to the continental shelf. A number of the regional seas,
e.g. the North Sea, Japan’s Inland Sea, the Baltic and the Mediterranean
have been the subject of convention or treaty agreements in addition to the
efforts of the UNEP to try to control pollution more effectively.
Meeting in Jamaica in 1982, the UN launched the Convention on the
Law of the Sea (with agreements effective to 2500 m depth from the shore).
Some developing countries are keen to see the oceans, like Antarctica, declared
common heritage, rather than becoming de facto possessions of those countries
with the wealth and technology to exploit the resources.
extended state sovereignty over natural resources (especially apparent in respect to
ocean territorial limits). There has been some progress, e.g.: the EU is developing a
form of supranational legislation, and the UNEP argues that international law should
deal with protecting the world’s life support systems.
Alternative dispute resolution
Disputes about resource exploitation and environmental management can be
addressed in a number of ways (see Mitchell, 1997:218–239 for an overview; Napier,
1998 for more detailed coverage of environmental conflict resolution):
55
CHAPTER THREE
1 through legal measures (judicial);
2 through political measures;
3 through administrative measures;
4 through alternative dispute resolution measures (which may not use law).
Legal measures rely upon courts, litigation, protocols and procedures, etc. Political
measures rely upon elected or established representatives to decide. Administrative
measures can be used to improve resources and environmental management.
Alternative dispute resolution can be through a range of measures, including:
♦ negotiation;
♦ mediation;
♦ arbitration;
♦ public consultation.
Environmental management legislation may specify the use of some of these
measures, or they may be adopted voluntarily. Negotiation is a process whereby two
or more groups agree to meet to explore solutions, in the hope of reaching consensus.
Mediation is similar to negotiation, but involves a mutually accepted neutral third
party who finds facts and tries to facilitate discussion. The mediator may act with
groups that are unwilling to meet face to face, if need be ‘filtering’ the exchanges to
help reach agreement. Arbitration involves a third party like mediation, but at the
outset the parties involved agree to give the arbitrator power to make decisions (which
may or may not be binding).
Recommended reading and resources
Journals which publish articles on business and environmental management
Business and Environment Abstracts
Business Ethics
Business Strategy and the Environment
Corporate Environmental Policy
Eco-Management and Auditing
Greener Management International
Industry and the Environment
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
Journal of Industrial Ecology
Management Science
Total Quality Environmental Management
56
BUSINESS AND LAW
Some organizations and bodies concerned with business and environmental
management
♦ Business for Social Responsibility
♦ Coalition for Environmentally Responsible Economics (USA)
♦ Green Ethics Investors, e.g.:
Commercial Union Environmental Exempt Pension Fund
Eagle Star Environmental Opportunities Trust
Merlin International Green Investment Trust
Social Investment Forum (USA)
TSB Environmental Investor Fund (UK)
♦ Institute of Business Ethics
♦ International Network for Environmental Management (seeks to develop and
apply principles of environmental management—over 500 member companies
in 1994; non-profit organization established in 1991 by Austrian, Swedish and
German businesses)
Journals which publish articles on law and environmental management
Ecology Law Quarterly
Environmental Policy and Law
Journal of Environmental Law
Journal of Planning and Environment Law
Land Management and Environmental Law Report
Ocean & Coastal Management
57
Chapter 4
Standards, monitoring,
modelling, eco-auditing
and environmental
management systems
♦ Standards 60
♦ Monitoring 62
♦ Surveillance 63
♦ Modelling 64
♦ Environmental auditing, environmental
accounting, eco-auditing, assessment, and
evaluation 64
♦ Eco-auditing 66
♦ Environmental management systems 69
♦ Recommended reading 74
59
In chapter 1 two principles of environmental management were noted: prudence
and stewardship. Standards, monitoring, and the other approaches covered in this
chapter are crucial for pursuing those principles. They are vital for meaningful
evaluation on which to base forward planning and policy decisions, for law making
and enforcement, for effective implementation, co-ordination, and for avoiding
unwanted impacts. The establishment of widely applicable scientific standards has
been one of the most important achievements of western civilization (‘standards
of behaviour’ —ethics—have been discussed earlier, pp. 22–24). Monitoring,
modelling, auditing and environmental management systems help ensure ongoing
objectives are set and met, check progress and warn of problems and opportunities.
Put crudely, standards are benchmarks and the other things discussed in this chapter
are concerned with understanding what is happening, checking and stock-taking,
using those benchmarks.
Standards
A standard may be defined as a widely accepted or approved example of something
against which others may be measured. They allow meaningful evaluation, exchange
and comparison of data, improve objectivity of judgement (so are important to
science), aid recognition of crucial thresholds and limits, support negotiation, law
making and comparison (between sites, between countries and between years).
Standards have existed from ancient times: the Egyptians, Greeks and Romans had
units of measurement and coinage, medieval European craft guilds set standards for
the quality of goods, and by the nineteenth century Britain, France and some other
countries had institutes and observatories which developed, managed and regulated
the standard units used to record data.
Unfortunately, national standards often ran in parallel, so that data collected
in, say, a French colony would have to be converted to units used in Britain. Conversion
may sometimes be easy, but if the indicators used or the means of gathering data
differ, even rough comparison may be difficult. A useful standard in a temperate
country may be meaningless in the humid tropics (there are still tropical countries
which have building standards inherited from temperate colonial powers which specify
roofs to cope with snowfall). Without world-wide standards it is difficult to research
the structure and function of the environment and to monitor global conditions. Before
the late 1950s various international unions had agreed standards for some fields,
such as telegraphy and radio, but not so much for the environmental sciences. One
achievement of the International Geophysical Year (1957–58) and subsequent global
exchanges of hydrological, meteorological, geophysical and biological data was the
development of better international environmental standards.
As research into environmental issues progresses, new standards are needed,
60
STANDARDS AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
for example to assess ‘safe’ levels of chemical pollution or radioactivity. The process
is ongoing, involving various national and international institutes and standards
organizations (e.g. the British Standards Institution or the International Standards
Organization). Advances in medical knowledge, toxicology, ecology, etc., force the
revision of some established standards. Ozone-damaging CFCs were considered inert
and safe in the late 1930s, and environmental levels of DDT caused little concern
before the 1960s. New standards are being developed which take into account factors
like the greater vulnerability of children to some pollutants.
There are a number of ways of developing a standard, each with advantages
and disadvantages, e.g. a standard for checking that fruit does not exceed ‘safe’
levels of a pesticide might be based on a simple maximum residue level (MRL), or a
sort of lump sum, or an acceptable daily intake (ADI) —which assumes consumers
all eat a given amount per day. It is consequently important that an environmental
manager knows the characteristics of a standard as well as the levels measured by it
(and the reliability of the measurements). The methods of data collection as well as
the agreed units must be standardized. Taking the same meteorological measurements
in the lee of a house and in open countryside or at various times of day gives quite
different results, making comparison difficult. Collecting data is often expensive; it
is therefore important to avoid poorly focused, encyclopaedic data collection, and it
is a good idea to ‘scope’ first (assess what should be measured and how).
Standards often rely upon indicators, things that can be relatively easily measured,
and which have specific meaning. Some indicators are precise and reliable, others less
so. Sometimes when a broader focus is needed, or the process to be monitored is
complex, a composite index may be devised which is the sum of a number of different
measurements, e.g. the Human Development Index (OECD, 1991; UNDP, 1991).
Environmental standards may be divided into broad groups: those concerned with
ensuring human health and safety; those concerned with maintaining environmental
quality; those concerned with the quality of consumer items.
Standards play a crucial part in:
♦ monitoring;
♦ modelling to understand the environment and establish trends;
♦ negotiation;
♦ enforcement of rules;
♦ environmental auditing;
♦ maintaining environmental quality.
The fields of activity which make use of standards include:
♦ pollution control;
♦ health and safety;
♦ public hygiene and health (especially domestic water supplies, sewage and
waste disposal);
♦ consumer goods (food standards; electrical safety; electromagnetic radiation
safety);
61
CHAPTER FOUR
♦ pharmaceutical products;
♦ transport safety and quality;
♦ disclosure of information to the public.
Standards are of little use if they are not effectively enforced. Another
difficulty is that standards may sometimes be relaxed, usually for profit or strategic
reasons. The expression REGNEG (renegotiation of regulations) has been applied
to the situation where a developer succeeds in persuading the authorities to relax
or modify regulations in its favour, making it easier to meet standards or avoid
assessments.
Monitoring
Monitoring aims to establish a system of continued observation, measurement and
evaluation for defined purposes. It may provide information at the start of a
development, during implementation or after completion. Without monitoring, it
can be difficult or impossible to establish how things are performing. Monitoring is
the process of keeping the health of the environment (and with social monitoring, of
society) in view (Spellerberg, 1991:xi). If sustainable development is a goal,
monitoring is vital.
Monitoring should be operated to agreed schedules with comparable methods.
The focus may be on biology, chemical pollution, air pollution, or any other aspect
of the environment. It is seldom possible to obtain a precise, detailed picture of all
environmental parameters (let alone social, economic ones, etc.). Monitoring is
therefore often undertaken for a specific reason (or reasons), for the systematic
measurement of selected variables (Mitchell, 1997:261), to:
♦ improve understanding of environmental, social or economic processes;
♦ provide early warning;
♦ help optimize use of the environment and resources;
♦ assist in regulating environmental and resources usage (e.g. it may provide
information for law courts);
♦ assess conditions;
♦ establish baseline data, trends, cumulative effects, etc;
♦ check that required standards are being met, or see whether something of interest
has changed;
♦ document sinks, sources, etc;
♦ test models, verify hypotheses or research;
♦ determine the effectiveness of measures or regulations;
♦ provide information for decision-making;
♦ advise the public.
The UNEP promoted global environmental monitoring at the 1972 UN
Conference on the Human Environment. There has been increasing interest, spurred
by transboundary problems, in developing international monitoring systems. These
62
STANDARDS AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
seek to monitor at the global level and ideally offer wide access to their
information (those bodies involved include the UNEP, OECD, EEC; and the
International Atomic Energy Commission). The UNEP has established the Global
Environmental Monitoring System (GEMS), which is a co-ordinated programme
for gathering data for use in environmental management and for early warning
of disasters. An independent international research unit was founded in 1975 to
assist international organizations with monitoring—the Monitoring and
Assessment Research Centre (MARC). This concentrates on biological and
ecological monitoring, particularly pollution. The World Conservation Monitoring
Centre was established in 1980 by upgrading an IUCN-run body, to monitor
endangered plant and animal species. The US Food and Drugs Administration
monitors pharmaceutics and foods. The spread and use of weapons (especially
nuclear, chemical and biological) are increasingly monitored by international
bodies. In most countries, doctors, vets and other professionals report observed
effects to central monitoring bodies.
Monitoring may show how the environment, a society, or economy changes,
aiding understanding of structure and function. Monitoring, surveillance and screening
(the checking of a specific thing, e.g. a particular disease in a population—not to be
confused with impact assessment screening) are valuable development aids but they
can generate problems over who should administer, enforce and pay for them.
Surveillance
Surveillance is repetitive measurement of selected variables over a period of time,
but with a less clearly defined purpose than monitoring. It is more exploratory and
can be undertaken to determine trends, calibrate or validate models, make short-
term forecasts, ensure optimal development, warn of the unexpected, etc. Surveillance,
like monitoring, can focus on the environment, people or an economy, and may:
♦ check whether statutory regulations are complied with (without monitoring
and surveillance the setting of standards and rules is of little value);
♦ provide information for systems control or management;
♦ assess environmental quality to see whether it remains satisfactory;
♦ detect unexpected changes.
Where monitoring seeks to establish the ongoing picture, it may be important
to examine past conditions and establish trends to understand the present and permit
extrapolation of possible future scenarios. For example, studies of climate changes
and ecological responses give clues to possible future conditions.
Environmental, social and economic monitoring have each generated their own
practitioners and literature, which may focus at local, regional, national or global
level or study ‘pathways’ (e.g. for pollution). Surveillance and monitoring can be
done at source (where something is being generated), at selected sample points, at
random, along transects, or by sampling some suitable material or organism. For
example, pollution might be monitored by checking a smokestack, by a network of
63
CHAPTER FOUR
instruments, or by surveying lichen species diversity and growth. Regulatory
monitoring checks its findings against set, in-house, national or international standards
or stated objectives.
For the last few decades, and at a gathering pace, remote monitoring and
surveillance have been possible: at its most extreme, data gathering by unmanned
space vehicles; also by orbiting or geo-stationary satellites, reconnaissance aircraft
and automatic weather or oceanographic data-gathering stations. The best data are
of little use if poorly co-ordinated, so bodies have evolved to support surveillance
and monitoring on an international scale and disseminate results to where they are
useful.
Modelling
A model is a caricature or simplification of reality: often a set of equations, used to
predict the behaviour of a variable or variables. The predictions can be imperfect,
but good modelling should cope with change and inadequate data. There are many
types of model, developed by various disciplines: computer models, analogue
models, conceptual models, role-play exercises, etc. Conceptual models are used
to see what needs study and to help formulate and check hypotheses and to organize
ideas. Simulation or predictive models can provide EIA with an indication of what
may happen in the future, and can help environmental managers see how something
is proceeding. Hydrologists may set up a scale model of a river estuary and release
flows of water to study tides, currents, flooding, scour and deposition.
Climatologists are developing general circulation models, using powerful computers
to try to establish likely future climate change. Input-output models have been
used by regional planners and environmental managers for integrated environmental
management and strategic environmental management. Futures models or world
models were used to produce The Limits to Growth and other futures predictions.
Ecosystem simulation modelling is applied to specific ecosystems; social scientists
use social modelling to predict socioeconomic impact, and economists use economic
models to try to establish micro- or macro-economic trends and to test ideas for
manipulating an economy.
Environmental auditing, environmental accounting,
eco-audit, assessment, and evaluation
The environmental manager needs to have an idea of the state of the environment,
and of any threats, future problems or opportunities. There has been some confusion
over the use of the terms ‘environmental auditing’ and ‘assessment’. Environmental
auditing has been applied to stock-taking, eco-review, eco-survey, eco-audit, eco-
evaluation, environmental assessment (another vague expression), state-of-the-
environment assessment, the production of ‘green charters’ and the checking of impact
assessments to determine their effectiveness (Cahill, 1989; Edwards, 1992; Grayson,
1992; Thomson, 1993; Buckley, 1995).
64
STANDARDS AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
Environmental accounting is reasonably distinct from auditing; state-of-the-
environment accounts (see chapter 5) and environmental quality evaluation use
knowledge of how the ecosystem is structured and functions to collect data showing
the state of an area (not only terrestrial; seas like the Baltic have been assessed).
These approaches seek to establish the current status of an ecosystem; EIA (see
later) focuses on the future effects of development. Ecological evaluation seeks to
establish what is of value.
At first glance environmental auditing would seem to mean establishing the
latest picture provided by monitoring; however, it is more complex. Environmental
audit can be conducted at company, institution, state, national or global levels, and
may mean: (1) an auditing (i.e. stock-taking or inventory-focus) approach to the
environment which seeks to review conditions and evaluate impacts of development
(e.g. new systems of national accounts); (2) studies aimed at avoiding or reducing
environmental damage; or (3) a means by which a body systematically and
holistically monitors the quality of the environment it interacts with or is responsible
for (vital in any quest for sustainable development). The latter activity is now usually
termed ‘eco-audit’, an internal review of the activities and plans of a company or
other body.
State-of-the-environment accounts set out a region’s or nation’s environmental,
social and economic assets. Norway, France, The Netherlands, Canada and the World
Bank have developed national state-of-the-environmental accounts systems—for
example, France’s Comptes du Patrimoine Naturel (‘national heritage accounts’),
developed since 1978. National state-of-the-environment accounts make use of
environmental assessment and have been promoted as improvements on indicators
like gross domestic product to document development status. They may prove
important in future trade agreements to ensure that environmental effects are counted,
and in the quest for sustainable development (Ahmad et al., 1989). However, there
has been criticism of environmental accounting, mainly that it is just stock-taking
and stops short of encouraging a change of attitude towards the environment and a
precautionary approach.
In the UK environmental assessment has been used by government bodies to
mean EIA; elsewhere the term is applied to pre-development stock-taking, for example
site-selection for a nuclear waste repository. In the USA an environmental assessment
means a concise public document which should provide enough evidence for a
decision to be made on whether or not to proceed to a full EIA. Environmental
assessment has also been applied to surveillance or screening—like checking drugs
or industrial activities, and it is used for study which seeks to establish the state of an
environment with less focus on impacts than EIA.
Environmental appraisal is a generic term used in the UK for the evaluation of
the environmental implications of proposals. Environmental appraisal is sometimes
used as an equivalent of environmental assessment or environmental evaluation. A
number of agencies have published environmental appraisal guidelines (see Barrow
1997:23).
65
CHAPTER FOUR
Eco-auditing
Eco-auditing (corporate environmental auditing or environmental management
systems auditing) may be defined as a systematic multidisciplinary methodology
used periodically and objectively to assess the environmental performance of a
company, public authority or, in some instances, a region. Eco-audits can be done
in-house, by a government team, or by an independent, accredited specialist or team.
So far, it has been mainly a voluntary process (in relation to finance and company
matters, ‘auditing’ implies involuntary) that seeks to increase public awareness and
aid the quest for sustainable development. Sometimes eco-audits are not voluntary:
there have been cases where shareholders have demanded eco-audits at public
meetings (The Times, 11 April 1997:25), and aid agencies increasingly demand them
before granting funding.
Impact assessment deals with potential effects of proposed developments; eco-
auditing focuses on actual effects of established activities. Both impact assessment
and eco-audit can be valuable tools for environmental management provided that
management is committed to adequate action on the findings.
Eco-audit evolved as a management tool in the USA in the 1980s as companies
were held more responsible for the damage they caused and realized the need for a
green image (EPA, 1988; Shillito, 1994; Buckley, 1995; Gilpin, 1995). It has been
promoted in Europe by the International Chamber of Commerce and by some
multinational corporations as a means of getting effective environmental management
(International Chamber of Commerce, 1989; 1991). A significant step forward has
been the development of eco-audit standards/environmental management and audit
systems, the world’s first being offered by the British Standards Institution (BS 7750)
in 1992. This moved beyond assessment of environmental effects to ensure that bodies
made commitments to continual environmental improvement.
Eco-audit handbooks and guidebooks began to appear in the mid-1980s
(Harrison, 1984; Blakeslee and Grabowski, 1985; Grayson, 1992; Local Government
Management Board, 1991; 1992; Thompson and Therivel, 1991; Spedding et al.,
1993; McKenna & Co., 1993; Richards and Biddick, 1994). In 1986 the US
Environmental Protection Agency issued an Environmental Auditing Policy
Statement, designed to encourage the use of eco-audits by US companies, and laid
down guidelines.
Eco-audit is increasingly practised in the USA, Europe, Australia and other
developed countries, further impetus being given by the publication of Agenda 21,
and by the European Commission’s Fifth Environmental Action Programme (1992).
The latter seeks to promote ‘shared responsibility’ (by people, commerce and
government) for the environment, popular green awareness, and a move towards
sustainable development, and it supports eco-audit (see Figure 4.1). In 1992 18 of
the UK’s top companies undertook eco-audits; by 1996 roughly half the country’s
firms had eco-audited—a rapid, voluntary spread. Eco-auditing is part of a growing
shift from mere compliance with regulations to developing forward-looking
environmental management strategies (Willig, 1994; Sunderland, 1996), so it supports
the principle of prudence. There has been less progress in developing countries,
66
STANDARDS AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
FIGURE 4.1 European Union Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS) eco-audit
award logo
Note: This can be used on a company’s brochures, letterhead, reports and advertisements,
but must make no reference to specific products or services, and may not be used on product
pacakages.
although India has modified its Companies Act to include a requirement for eco-
audits, and Indonesia has required companies to conduct eco-audits since 1995.
Eco-audits offer some or all of the following benefits:
♦ they generate valuable data for regional or national state-of-the-environment
reports;
♦ they are a means for ensuring the continual improvement of environmental
management;
♦ they may be a valuable way of monitoring;
♦ they can help establish an effective environmental protection scheme, which
may reduce insurance premiums (Finsinger and Marx, 1996);
♦ they can assist efforts for sustainable development;
♦ they can inform the public about the body’s environmental performance, which
is good PR;
♦ they can help involve the public in environmental management;
♦ they help identify cost recovery through recycling, opportunities for sale of
by-products, etc;
♦ they reduce risks of being accused of negligence and losing court cases;
♦ they may reduce the need for government inspections;
♦ they can ensure that often complex regulations are known about and followed
and licences are obtained;
♦ they offer management more peace of mind.
There may also be risks associated with eco-audits:
♦ they may spot a problem that is costly to cure, which might otherwise have
been overlooked without too much harm;
67
CHAPTER FOUR
♦ they can be expensive;
♦ a body may fear trade secrets will be exposed to competitors;
♦ smaller companies cannot do eco-auditing in-house and must use specialists
from outside (costly, with a risk of loss of trade secrets).
There are two broad categories of eco-audit: (a) industrial—private sector
corporate eco-audits, (b) local authority or higher-level government eco-audits
(sometimes called ‘green charters’) —these are more standardized than industrial
(private sector) corporate eco-audits, and are commissioned by local authorities to
show local environmental quality (Levett, 1993; Barrett, 1995; Leu et al., 1995)
(Box 4.1). Some local authorities produce state-of-the-environment reports which
are not the same as audits carried out as part of an environmental management system
approach (see later in this chapter).
BOX 4.1 Types of eco-audit
♦ Site or facility audit a company or body audits to see how it conforms to
safety and other regulations and care for the environment.
♦ Compliance audit to assess whether regulations are being heeded and/or
policy is being followed.
♦ Issues audit assessment of the impact of a company’s or other body’s
activities on a specific environmental or social issue, e.g. rainforest
loss (Grayson, 1992: 40).
♦ Minimization audit to see if it is possible to reduce: waste; inputs; emission
of pollutants (including noise); energy consumption, etc.
♦ Property transfer audits (pre-acquisition audit, merger audit, disvestiture
audit, transactional audit, liability audit) —a company or body audits prior
to disvestiture, takeover, joint venture, alliance, altering a lease, sale of assets,
etc., to show if there are any problems such as contaminated land.
♦ Waste audits to see if regulations are met, whether costs can be reduced by
sale of by-products, etc. (Ledgerwood et al., 1992; Thompson and Wilson,
1994). The motivation to audit may be to comply with legislation or come
from a desire to prevent problems.
♦ Life-cycle assessment/analysis evaluation that can extend beyond the time
horizon of a single owner, company or government (it is cradle-to-grave),
e.g. impacts of something from manufacture, through use to disposal (Fava,
1994; British Standards Institution, 1994c).
Note: Even within a single company eco-audit must check for variation from
unit to unit and allow for change that takes place as plant ages. Eco-audit may
extend to checking environmental impacts of suppliers, subsidiaries, use and
disposal of products and packaging.
68
STANDARDS AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
In the UK the first eco-audit by a local authority took place in 1989 (Kirklees
District Council, assisted by Friends of the Earth). Roughly 87 per cent of UK local
government authorities had used eco-audit or planned to by 1991, encouraged by
the UK 1990 Environmental Protection Act (Grayson, 1992:50). Unfortunately, some
of the eco-audits produced little more than publicity documents.
There is considerable overlap between eco-audit and health and safety
management—some countries now test the environmental quality of new buildings
to ensure that they do not harm employees, that they use eco-friendly construction
materials and do not waste energy. Energy efficiency and better employment
conditions mean savings on power bills and less absenteeism.
Barton and Bruder (1995:xv) see local eco-audit as a key measure in the delivery
of sustainable development as ‘a process for establishing what sustainable
development means in practice—how to interpret it locally, how to test whether you
are achieving it’. They recognized two components in eco-audit: (1) external—
collation of available data to produce a state-of-the-environment report, and (2)
internal—the state-of-the-environment report as a foundation for efforts to assess
policies and practices (Barton and Bruder, 1995:12). First-time audits are usually
more complex than follow-up audits.
Various bodies and companies publish eco-audit guidelines or manuals which
can help other auditors, and there is also use of computers, expert systems and
information technology (retrieval systems like LEXIS conceptual, or hypertext
searching). However, guidelines and computer aids are not enough: effective
environmental management demands commitment. Some companies, authorities
and educational establishments have tried to do eco-auditing on the cheap, which
tends to give inadequate results. Doing this also poses risks from institutional
politics—e.g. ministries may compete; companies may be rivals; internal squabbles
may distort things.
Once standards like BS 7750 improve and spread, together with better training
and accreditation of auditors, these problems should be reduced (Buckley, 1995:
292–293; Gleckman and Krut, 1996). The standards that have so far evolved mainly
relate to developed countries, and require modification for use in poorer countries.
There is also a need for internationally recognized standards (or even a single world
standard) for eco-audit. Worries have been voiced that some standards are determined
more by politics, special-interest groups and public opinion than by objective science
(Ludwig et al., 1992; Rensvik, 1994; Reisenweber, 1995). Box 4.2 presents some
eco-audit-environmental management system standards.
Environmental management systems
Eco-audits alone are snapshot views: they are more effective if they are part of a
structured environmental management system. Environmental management systems
(EMSs) were developed in response to the realization that there was a need for an
integrated and proactive approach to environmental issues. They are a means for
helping industry, or other bodies, comply with environmental regulations, obtain
69
CHAPTER FOUR
BOX 4.2 Eco-audit-environmental management system standards
Note: These standards, which deal with environmental management systems
(EMSs), have evolved from total quality management (TQM), and are
quality auditing systems. They must be widely applicable, effective at
getting regulation, yet flexible. It is also desirable that they help integrate
environmental management quality standards with commercial quality
management (product/ service quality) standards and occupational health
and safety quality management standards (Young, 1994).
BS7750
In early 1992 the world’s first eco-audit standard was published—British
Standards Institute’s BS7750 Specification for Environmental Management
Systems (British Standards Institution, 1992; 1994a; 1994b; Hunt and Johnson,
1995:89) —derived from an earlier Management Quality System BS5750. A
number of countries adopted it and it was revised in 1993 and 1994 to make it
more compatible with the more recently introduced Eco-Management and Audit
Scheme (EMAS—which has drawn upon BS7750) (Bohoris and O’Mahoney,
1994; Sharratt, 1995:41–53; Willig, 1994:33–42; Buckley, 1995). BS7750 is a
means by which an organization can establish an EMS. To obtain BS7750 a
body has to establish and maintain environmental procedures and an
environmental protection system which meets BS7750 specifications and
demonstrate compliance. It must also be committed to cycles of self-
improvement through internal eco-audit. There are three elements to BS7750:
(1) possession of an environmental policy; (2) a documented EMS; (3) a register
of effects on the environment.
Critics of BS7750 argue that it is possible to get the standard by
promising to do better and then to release relatively little information to
the public (it is not as open as, say, the US Toxic Releases Inventory). At
the time of writing BS7750 did not provide for a publicity logo and was
being superseded by the ISO14001 series.
EMAS
The Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS) was launched in 1993 (EU
Council Regulation 1836/93) although it was not until April 1995 that it came
into force in the UK (Welford, 1992; EEC, 1993; Brown, 1995). EMAS goes
beyond eco-audit to require an approved EMS and the production of an
independently verified public statement. EMAS seeks to encourage industries
in EU states to adopt a site-specific, proactive approach to environmental
management and improve their performance. EMAS is in some ways similar
to, and is broadly compatible with, the already established BS7750, but is
much broader in scope and requires greater public reporting of audits. It is
stronger than BS7750 on environmental protection, and is aimed more at
70
STANDARDS AND MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
industrial activities. EMAS is also stronger on ensuring that a body regulates
its environmental impacts.
EMAS registration is voluntary (but is established in the EEC by
regulation so that consistent rules are supposed to be set for all those
participating). Participants write and adopt an environmental policy which
includes commitments to: meeting all legislative requirements and ensuring
continued improvement of performance; implementation of an environmental
programme with objectives and targets derived from a comprehensive review
process; establishing a management system (which includes future
environmental audits) to deliver these objectives and targets; issue public
environmental statements (EMAS does not insist on full publication of audits).
Originally it had been planned to make full public disclosure compulsory but
this was abandoned. An accredited third party verifies all these things (see
Journal of the Institution of Environmental Sciences 4(3) —May 1995, pp. 4–
7). If these terms are broken, the organization may be suspended from EMAS,
and so lose their right to a special logo (green credentials), which means loss
of publicity advantage and possibly increased insurance premiums or supplier,
investment, or sales-outlet boycott (see Figure 4.1).
Criticisms of EMAS include the charge that its auditing criteria are vague
(Karl, 1994); that it disrupts the activities of an organization; that it may reveal
trade secrets and; perhaps cause public or workforce hostility. There are signs
in the UK that small companies find the cost of BS7750 more of a challenge
than do larger companies. There are also calls for EMAS to increase the focus
on sustainable development (Spencer-Cooke, 1996).
Europe is improving EMAS by introducing strategic environmental
assessment to all plans, policies and programmes (Barton and Bruder,
1995:11) (see chapter 3). There were also plans at the time of writing to
expand EMAS to make it more compatible with the ISO 14001 series. If the
EEC adopts an Environmental Charter, eco-audit will become more
widespread, possibly even compulsory.
ISO14000
The International Standards Organization (ISO) has been seeking to develop a
standard (or rather, a series of standards, some advisory, some contractual)
broadly compatible with EMAS and BS7750. ISO[DIS] 14001 was introduced
in 1996, and the series also incorporates ISO14004. ISO14001 provides
information on the requirements for an EMS, and ISO14004 has the elements
needed and guidance on implementation of an EMS.
The ISO1400 series are roughly equivalent to BS7750 and EMAS, but
more user-friendly and easier to understand, and seem likely to gain world-
wide adoption (for details see Rothery, 1993; Baxter and Bacon, 1996;
Jackson, 1997; Sheldon, 1997). These ISO standards are related to the
continued . . .
71
CHAPTER FOUR
ISO9000 series (roughly equivalent to BS5750) which are widely used by
business world-wide and deal with quality systems (TQM) registration. The
ISO 14001 standard is taking over from BS7750 and is periodically updated
(details are usually published in ENDS—see list of journals at the end of chapter
1 (Knight, 1997)).
technical and economic benefits, and are designed to ensure that an environmental
policy and environmental objectives are adopted and followed (standards like BS7750
or EMAS require an EMS to be established and maintained). Hunt and Johnson
(1995:89) argued that EMSs:
♦ help to develop a proactive environmental approach;
♦ ensure a balanced view across all functions;
♦ enable effective, directed environmental goal-setting;
♦ make the environmental auditing process effective.
An EMS usually requires a participating body to publish an environmental
policy statement and regularly update it. The standards used to eco-audit typically
test whether the body:
♦ has identified overall aims;
♦ understands constraints on achieving aims;
♦ identifies who is responsible for what;
♦ sets an overall timetable for achieving aims;
♦ has determined resource needs;
♦ has selected a project management approach;
♦ has a progress monitoring system.
EMSs rely on independent certification of compliance with set eco-audit
standards to encourage more careful planning. EMSs can in practice be difficult to
pursue effectively as a result of real-world institutional politics, funding problems,
data shortages, need for industrial secrecy, health and safety issues. There is a
need to improve the sustainable development aspects of eco-audits. Figure 4.2
illustrates a basic EMS approach. The EMAS approach is presented in Figure 4.3;
see also Box 4.2.
72
FIGURE 4.2 Basic environmental management system approach
Source: Based, with modifications, on Hunt and Johnson (1995:6, Fig. 1.2)
FIGURE 4.3 The basic provisions of the European Union’s EMAS
Source: Hunt and Johnson (1995:74, Fig. 4.2)
73
CHAPTER FOUR
Recommended reading
Journals which publish articles on monitoring, eco-auditing and EMSs
Eco-Management and Auditing
Environmental Accounting and Auditing Reporter
Environmental Assessment
Environmental Auditing
Environmental Management
Environmental Monitoring and Assessment
Impact Assessment and Project Appraisal
Journal of Environmental Planning and Management
74
Chapter 5
Environmental
management and
economics
♦ The ‘greening’ of economics 76
♦ Environmental economics 79
♦ Global environmental problems and
economics 79
♦ Environmental accounts 80
♦ Evaluating the environment and natural
resources 81
♦ Green taxes 82
♦ Green funding 84
♦ Debt, structural adjustment and environment 86
♦ Paying for conservation 87
♦ Trade and environmental management 88
♦ Recommended reading 92
75
Regardless of the stance adopted, whether utopian, utilitarian, libertarian, Malthusian,
cornucopian, etc., for almost as long as economics has existed, economists have
invoked the ‘invisible hand of the market’ as a mechanism that supposedly ensures
that it becomes uneconomical to exploit a potentially renewable resource before it is
badly damaged. Pareto optimum, a basic theorem of welfare economics, states that
through market exchange, with each person pursuing their private interests, there are
effective controls over resources exploitation and use of the environment; it also
states that, except in inefficient market situations, it is not possible to make anyone
better off without making at least one person worse off. Unfortunately, the market
has not been an effective control: there are plenty of examples of ruined fisheries,
lost forests, etc. to prove it. At present:
‘“the free market” does not provide consumers with proper information, because
the social and environmental costs of production are not part of current
economic models…. Private profits are being made at public costs in the
deterioration of the environment and the general quality of life, and at the
expense of future generations.’
(Capra, 1997:291)
The market may fail to control exploitation for various reasons, including
difficulty in valuing many resources (e.g. what is the worth of a rare plant?); some
things are valueless as a use has yet to be found for them. Resources and environment
may be used to give outputs (such as crops) or benefits (such as recreational use) or
there may be non-use (intrinsic) value (e.g. conservation provides material for future
pharmaceutical use or crop-breeding). When a resource or the environment has current
utility (i.e. can give ‘satisfaction’), this may be gained directly (e.g. use of land for
recreation or tourism) or indirectly though manufacturing (Perman et al., 1996).
Figure 5.1 lists the elements of total economic value.
The ‘greening’ of economics
Many of the attempts at a concise definition of economics mention ‘resources’,
‘the Earth’, ‘the environment’, e.g. ‘economics is essentially the stewardship
of resources’ (Hanson, 1977); or ‘economics offers a framework within which
to analyse the problems which we face in making choices about the
environment in which we live’ (Hodge, 1995:3); or ‘economics is concerned
with the allocation, distribution and use of environmental resources’
(Perman et al., 1996:24). It is thus puzzling why, before the last decade,
there was little contact between economics and environmental studies.
76
ECONOMICS
FIGURE 5.1 The elements of total economic value
Source: Hodge (1995:7, Fig. 1.2)
The failure to weave environmental sensitivity into economics has been flagged as a
cause of many of the world’s problems. Given the difficulties involved in effectively
valuing nature, and in dealing with human use of the environment and resources,
such criticisms are perhaps unfair. Nevertheless, before the 1980s few economists
recognized the Earth was finite, and most encouraged expansion.
In 1798 Thomas Malthus published his first essay: its warnings about limits
were largely ignored until after the 1940s, when it became clear that open frontiers
(i.e. further vacant land for development) were closing, and pollution disasters
warned of the need for environmental sensitivity. One of the first to publish on
resource and conservation economics was Ciracy-Wantrup (1952). Fourteen years
later Boulding (1966) inspired many with his writings on the economics of
Spaceship Earth which acknowledged that the world was finite and vulnerable.
Further impetus to ‘greening’ was given by the publications of Meadows et al.
(1972) and Schumacher (1973). By the late 1970s a little greening of economics
was apparent (Krutilla and Fisher, 1975; Hanson, 1977; Kneese, 1977; Cooper,
1981). Green economics is essentially concerned with the consequences of the
drive to amass wealth (Ekins, 1992a; Buarque, 1993).
Work on theoretical and practical environmental economics expanded after
the mid-1980s (Lowe and Lewis, 1980). Since the 1970s considerable effort has
gone into seeking alternatives to reliance upon market controls (Redclift, 1992). A
particular boost was given by the publication of Blueprint for a Green Economy
(Pearce et al., 1989) and related texts (Pearce et al., 1990; 1991; Pearce, 1995).
From the early 1990s there has been an increasing interest in economics and
environmental management (Marcandya and Richardson, 1992; Redclift, 1992;
Turner et al., 1994; Barbier, 1993; Funtowicz and Ravetz, 1994; Mikesell, 1995;
McGillivray, 1996). Increasingly the focus is on sustainable development (Pearce et
77
CHAPTER FIVE
al., 1990; Tisdell, 1993), on pollution control economics (e.g. Forsund and Strom,
1988), on economic development and environmental management (Schramm and
Warford, 1990), and on environmental taxes. Some economists adopt the concept of
sustainable development without acknowledging that the Earth and its resources are
finite, then talk of ‘sustained growth’ and explore ways of achieving it. There is
debate about the likelihood of real, sustainable growth.
There is no single unified market, and large sections of the world’s
population are not directly affected by economics. The reality is that many of
those suffering from environmental problems are ‘marginal’—economically
and socially deprived, perhaps living in remote situations. Also, one must not
assume universal co-operation between nations to protect the environment: some
countries or power groups may try to gain from global challenges, and exploit
situations.
Today, two widely stated goals of environmental economics are: (1) to
cut extravagant resource exploitation; (2) to seek sustainable development. Some
economists argue that environmental care should stimulate economic growth
by improving the health of the workforce, making it more productive and
creating employment in the green sector (pollution control and environmental
remediation, etc.).
BOX 5.1 An example which may have widespread promise: Curitiba
City, Brazil
Much of the success of Curitiba’s greening since the mid-1970s has been
through the efforts of its Mayor, Jaime Lerner, and have not depended on much
outside funding. He established an effective refuse collecting system for
Curitiba’s slums (favelas), where narrow alleyways make it impossible to use
lorries. Recycling bins were placed around the favelas and the people were
paid in city transport system tokens or welfare tokens for sorted, recyclable
trash. Organic wastes went to farmers for composting, and people collecting
this were rewarded with food stamps. The approach provides a sort of social
security system for the poor, who in return scour the city for refuse. The travel
tokens offer better access to employment and boost the use of public transport,
there are no costs for running garbage trucks and less need for street
construction.
Numerous other, largely self-help, innovations have made Curitiba a
landmark in green urban development. Curitiba has improved living conditions
for the poor and upgraded its infrastructure in spite of having had one of Brazil’s
most rapid growth rates (Rabinovitch, 1996). The city has been able to become
self-funding and no longer seeks aid from state government, is comparatively
clean and relatively prosperous. The city has an improved bus transport system
and crime rates have been kept low compared with other Brazilian cities.
78
ECONOMICS
There is no obvious tested model for improving people’s well-being and
protecting the environment—the USA has problems, as do Russia and China, Japan
and developing countries. A few glimmers of green are apparent, though, for example
the city of Curitiba (see Box 5.1). There have also been economists who are keen to
avoid the ‘commodity fetishism of mainstream economics’, and develop workable
‘green economics’ and ‘barefoot economics’ (Scitovsky, 1976; Max-Neef, 1986;
1992a; 1992b; Henderson, 1981a; 1981b; McBurney, 1990; Dodds, 1997). One
supposition is that steady-state economics might be developed to ensure that growth
does not lead to serious environmental degradation. How much inroad on mainstream
economics this makes remains to be seen (Booth, 1997). There has also been some
greening of mainstream accountancy (Gray, 1990).
Environmental economics
By the 1980s ‘new economics’ had appeared and environmental economics was
expanding (Costanza, 1991; Common, 1996). Bodies like the London Environmental
Economics Centre had been established and environmental issues had gained a much
higher profile (Tietenberg and Folmer, 1998). Even so, economics is still far from
becoming green—being aware of a problem is no guarantee that people change their
ways. Things like shadow pricing may be more often used, but macro-economics is
still generally reluctant to include environmental costs in calculations of things like
gross national product (GNP); economic growth is still a major goal, little change
from the 1970s when an environmentalist observed that ‘growth for the sake of growth
is the ideology of the cancer-cell’. A recent UK press advert called for an
‘environmental economist’
to explore how economic factors should be taken into account when drafting
and applying environmental regulations; to establish the value of economic
instruments within a mixed regime of regulations; to establish economic
measures of trends in the employing nation’s environmental capital.
There have been attempts to incorporate economic evaluation into environmental
impact assessment (James, 1994). Valuation of the environment must be improved
for developing and developed countries (Georgiou et al., 1997). For an introduction
to the economic theory involved in policy making for environmental management
see Baumol and Oates (1988).
Global environmental problems and economics
Those exploring policies to cope with climate change, transboundary pollution
and other global environmental problems need to know the likely costs,
approaches which may be useful, and economic controls. The economics of global
climate change is attracting considerable attention to try to resolve disagreement
between various countries and institutions over the apportionment of blame,
estimation of costs, and development of controls (Agarwal and Narain, 1991;
79
CHAPTER FIVE
Funkhauser, 1995; Tietenberg, 1997; Proost and Braden, 1998). Another area of
interest is technology change: in the early 1970s Farvar and Milton (1972)
suggested that careless application of technology caused socioeconomic problems.
Nowadays economists try to forecast the impacts of proposed innovations
(Tylecote and Van der Straaten, 1997).
Environmental accounts
Environmental auditing has been applied to: eco-audits (see chapter 4), stock-taking,
eco-review, eco-survey, etc. State-of-the-environment accounts, environmental quality
evaluations and environmental accounts systems collect data on the environment
and resources to try and show the state of an area (or sea like the Baltic or Aegean).
Most of these accounting procedures treat the environment as natural capital and try
to measure its depletion or enhancement. Valuing environmental features in monetary
terms can be difficult.
The foundation for these procedures has often been the UN model of Standard
National Accounts, usually with ‘satellite accounts’ added for environmental items—
some call these ‘environmentally adjusted national accounts’ (UN, 1993). Such
accounts seek to establish the stocks of resources, value of environmental features,
and their use over time (Newson, 1992:92). National environmental accounts systems
(new systems of national accounts, green accounts, patrimonial accounts, or state-
of-the-environment accounts) have been developed to assist with data gathering and
storage and to value environment and natural resources (Pearce et al., 1989:93–
119). Canada, Denmark, Norway, France, Japan, USA, The Netherlands and the
World Bank have developed national state-of-the-environment accounts since the
early 1970s and the UNEP has been promoting this type of accounting in developing
countries (Schramm and Warford, 1989:30; Alfsen and Bye, 1990; Hartwick, 1990;
Common and Norton, 1994; McGillivray, 1994). Most follow the Dutch model,
comparing output of each sector of the economy with how much it depletes finite
resources such as fossil fuel. Some countries are moving to include water pollution,
radioactive waste and other factors in their accounting.
These accounting systems seek to set out a region’s environmental, social
and economic assets, and can be used to assess whether economic development is
consistent with sustainable development, or help ensure optimal use of natural
resources and environment (Ahmad et al., 1989; Hamilton et al., 1994). For
example, a natural resource accounting system can help a manager establish what
percentage of, say, mineral exploitation profits to invest in long-term sustainable
development so that a region or country does not suffer boom and decline. In
practice, being able to make such investments depends on the type of government,
people’s attitudes and the persuasiveness of environmental management. Natural
resource accounts can show the linkages between the environment and the economy,
may be useful for forecasting, and can establish which habitats, etc., are of
importance. They should make land use more rational, and are an improvement on
the use of indicators like GNP (Thompson and Wilson, 1994:613) but stop short of
80
ECONOMICS
encouraging a crucial change in people’s and administrators’ attitudes towards
environmentally sound development.
In the mid-1990s the UK Office of National Statistics produced national
environmental accounts to try to measure the country’s economic performance,
assessing the environmental impact of each industry, using 1993 statistics. These
accounts show for various economic sectors the percentage contribution to the national
economy against percentage of total: greenhouse gas emission; responsibility for
acid deposition; and smoke emission (New Scientist 4 September 1996:11).
Evaluating the environment and natural resources
Ever since Ciracy-Wantrup (1952), resource inputs have been divided by assessors
into: renewable (regardless of management, also called ‘stock resources’); potentially
renewable (dependent on management); and non-renewable (Figure 5.2). Some
renewable resources can be converted to non-renewable through poor management
or natural disaster. Certain resources cannot be remade if damaged or exhausted
FIGURE 5.2 A classification of environmental resources
Source: Perman et al. (1996:4, Fig. 1.1)
81
CHAPTER FIVE
(e.g. biodiversity). The absorptive capacity of the environment (its ability to absorb
and neutralize damaging compounds or activities) is a resource which should be
assessed by economists. There may be opportunities to substitute for a given resource,
using labour, capital or alternative materials.
Cost—benefit analysis
Cost-benefit analysis (CBA) seeks to identify the impact of development on each
person affected at various points in time, and so estimate the aggregate value which
each person gains or loses. There is a huge literature on CBA, its shortcomings,
modifications and alternatives (Brent, 1997). Widespread dissatisfaction with CBA’s
effectiveness in valuing environmental issues has led to many suggested improvements
or alternatives, some favouring quantitative approaches, and others qualitative (Munda
et al., 1994). One focus has been to try to improve its consideration of environmental
issues, but this is still far from adequately solved (Hanley and Spash, 1994). A
development since the early 1990s is the concept of best available techniques not
involving excessive economic costs (BATNEEC). This places the onus on developers
to adopt the best techniques available, with only ‘excessive cost’ as a viable excuse
for not doing so (Pearce and Brisson, 1993).
Shadow prices
The difficulty of establishing the value of ‘externalities’, including environmental
factors, in monetary units has been addressed in several ways: one is to use shadow
prices. A shadow price is a value that reflects the true opportunity cost of a resource
or service. The real value of something reflects the most desirable alternative for it,
e.g. (in production) the opportunity cost of producing an extra unit of manufactured
goods is the lost output of childcare, food production, etc., forgone as a result of
transferring resources to manufacturing activities. In consumption, opportunity cost
is the amount of one commodity that must be forgone in order to consume more of
another (Todaro, 1994).
Green taxes
The use of taxation is an important tool for seeking environmental management
goals. Pearce (1995) urged environmental management to seek a balance between
using economic command and control (largely through taxes) and incentives. Capra
(1997: 292) suggested that one of the most effective ways of countering environmental
damage and supporting sustainable development would be to shift the tax burden
from income to ‘eco-taxes’. These could be added to products, energy, services and
materials, to reflect true costs. This means the consumer pays. While there have been
national measures for some time, interest in green taxation on an international scale
82
ECONOMICS
is recent (and still mainly theoretical), triggered by increasing transboundary pollution,
competition for internationally shared resources, and the threat of global
environmental change.
The function of green taxes is not to raise revenue for government but rather to
provide participants in the marketplace with accurate information about true costs.
For example, a tax on CFCs reflects their impact on ozone (Farber et al., 1995).
Green taxes counter the pursuit of lower prices by externalizing the true costs, ensuring
that the purchaser is aware of the costs of environmental impacts. It is important that
attempts to integrate external costs of production into prices does not burden the
poor or ‘punish’ the middle classes. The aim is to give people and companies
incentives to invent, innovate and respond to environmental challenges (Repetto et
al., 1992). Green taxation should encourage manufacturers to seek to reduce waste
and other environmental damage to keep down their costs and thus prices to the
purchaser—i.e. there is incentive to improve environmental practice. Taxation is also
becoming an important tool in the quest for sustainable development (Von Weisäcker
and Jesinghaus, 1992).
One problem associated with attempts to agree international green taxation is
that it may come into conflict with sovereignty (Nellor, 1987). There are a number
of taxation approaches that have potential for controlling global climate change:
tradeable emission quotas; carbon (emissions) tax; energy use tax; taxation associated
with technology transfers; reduced taxation for providing carbon sinks.
Pigouvian taxes
The idea of 1920s’ UK economist Arthur Pigou, these are intended to be levied on
(externalities) pollution, or activities it is desirable to discourage to achieve sound
environmental management (see chapter 4).
Carbon emissions taxes
A number of countries have already taken steps to adopt these. For an examination of
them and their welfare effects see Cornwall (1997). The prospects of a widely practised
global carbon tax is some way off. At the time of writing the EU looked close to setting
carbon taxes designed to stabilize emissions at the 1990 level by AD 2000.
Tradeable emissions quotas
Tradeable emissions quotas (TEQs) (marketable or auctionable permits or tradeable
emissions permits) have been applied in a number of countries. In the USA they
have been used for control of air pollution emissions for over a decade, and in France
to control water-borne effluent since 1969 (Owen and Unwin, 1997:402). There has
been considerable interest in the use of TEQs for dealing with transboundary
83
CHAPTER FIVE
atmospheric pollution, especially carbon dioxide emissions (for coverage of TEQ
developments in the EU see Koutstaal, 1997).
The 1997 Kyoto Climate Change Agreement has established a TEQ ‘club’
(Canada, Japan, USA, Russia) which will trade emissions permits among its
members—in effect, the USA and Japan have first rights to any permits offered by
Russia. This has left the EU to bear the burden of emission controls but saved
negotiations from collapse (New Scientist 18 December 1997:10).
Energy use taxes
Tax on vehicle fuel, domestic power supplies and household heating fuel can be
used to discourage excessive consumption. The cost of vehicle fuel in the USA is
still three to four times less than it is in Europe, so there is scope for taxation. Energy
taxes encourage efficient use and change to non-polluting alternatives, but could be
unfair to countries with less scope for the latter (such as those lacking hydroelectricity
or already committed to coal or oil).
Green funding
Funding and aid agencies are increasingly focusing on environmental management
and sustainable development (Rich, 1986; Turnham, 1991; Feitelson, 1992), and
they also check for risks, such as contaminated land, before supporting developments
(Kopitsky and Betzenberger, 1987).
The Global Environmental Facility (GEF), launched in 1990, is a corporate
venture between governments of industrialized and developing countries. The GEF
is jointly managed by the World Bank, UNDP and UNEP to assist developing countries
to tackle globally relevant environmental problems such as climate change; loss of
biodiversity; management of international waters; and stratospheric ozone depletion.
The GEF is targeted at poorer countries and involves NGOs in identifying, monitoring
and implementing projects. There were efforts in 1992 at the Earth Summit to increase
the profile of the GEF. Criticisms include the complaint that donors to the GEF have
simply cut back on other aid to finance it; that participation is not open enough or
wide enough; and that some developing countries want poverty alleviation included.
Aid and the environment
There is a wide range of forms and in the practice of aid: recipients may be
governments, bodies, groups of people or individuals. International agencies, NGOs,
individuals and groupings of governments may be donors. Sometimes donors
contribute aid directly to recipients, or it can be via an intermediary such as an NGO
or a UN body. When aid is government to government it is termed bilateral aid;
84
ECONOMICS
when several governments or an international organization have contributed it is
multilateral aid.
Frequently aid is tied or is conditional, i.e. requirements are attached to the
funding—a recipient may have to behave in a particular way or a percentage of the aid
must be used to buy goods and services from the donor nation. The latter arrangement
is known as ‘aid for trade provision’, and it is not unknown for obsolete, overpriced or
unsuitable goods or services to be traded (Hayter, 1989:21, 92). Aid may be in the
form of funding, foodstuffs or other supplies, sometimes training or secondment of
skilled manpower rather than donation of goods or funds. There are situations where
conditionality makes sense (environmental care or improvement may be a condition),
others where it is perceived as neo-protectionism or neo-colonialism, as an extra cost
and as a sign that there is a risk that support could be diverted. Environmental care is
increasingly a condition of aid (Keohane and Levy, 1996).
There has been criticism of some agencies’ aid policy for its impact on the
environment (Dinham, 1991; Hildyard, 1991). At the Earth Summit in 1992, Japan
offered more aid for the environment than any other nation, much tied to her export
or resources import policy and, according to Forrest (1991), has tended to support
large superprojects which have sometimes caused serious environmental impacts.
Aid may be well intended, but even providing roads can cause problems.
Environmentally benign aid is not easy to achieve. What to to a donor seems like
sensible safeguards to avoid unwanted environmental (and socioeconomic) impacts
may appear to a recipient to be excuses for more conditionality, delay and perhaps
loss of a portion of funding to pay for appraisals, safeguards and remedial measures,
and intrusion into sovereignty.
To combat global environmental problems will require considerable aid to poor
countries. At the Earth Summit richer nations were clearly reluctant to commit
themselves to the GEF, either for fear it would slow their economies or because they
wished to ensure tight control over how the aid was spent. The ‘democratization’ of
the USSR and its allies has meant less spending on arms and propaganda in both the
east and west but it may divert aid there which would have gone to developing
countries.
Academics and aid agencies have examined environmental (and socioeconomic)
aspects of aid, although surprisingly little has been published, given the huge sums
and considerable impacts involved (Linear, 1982; 1985; Adams and Solomon, 1985;
Hayter, 1989). Hayter (1989:83) listed a number of reasons why this might be.
Agencies have developed environmental guidelines and have staff to assess impacts
prior to granting assistance. For example, the World Bank established an Office of
Environmental Affairs in 1970 (Warford and Partow, 1989), and the UK Overseas
Development Administration (now the DFID) established environmental appraisal
procedures (ODA, 1984; 1989a; 1989b).
85
CHAPTER FIVE
Debt, structural adjustment and environment
Debt and environment
The ‘debt crisis’ broke in 1982, and soon claims were made that it resulted in
environmental degradation, although there was little clear proof (Adams, 1991;
George, 1988; 1992; Reed, 1992a:143; UN, 1992). During the 1970s many developing
countries financed their economies by taking loans. Falling prices for exports of
primary produce, rising costs for oil imports, and in some cases disorder and
maladministration led to escalating debt. The 1973–1974 OPEC oil price increase
caused further recession, driving down export prices and making debt repayment
difficult. Various impacts of debt have been recognized: (1) money diverted to
servicing debt is unavailable for environmental management; (2) resources are put
under pressure to earn foreign exchange for interest or to pay off debt; (3) means to
combat debt cause difficulty, notably structural adjustment measures.
By the 1990s Latin American and sub-Saharan countries were spending roughly
25 per cent of their total foreign exchange each year servicing debt (Davidson et al.,
1992:161). In spite of paying US$6,500 million a month interest between 1982 and
1990, debtor countries were still 61 per cent more indebted in 1991. The struggle to
earn foreign exchange to service debts damages biodiversity and the environment.
Debt problems, by reducing biodiversity and degrading the global environment, and
by causing poverty and conflict, also affect richer nations indirectly (George, 1992:
1–33). In 1991 under the Trinidad Terms the Paris Club of creditors agreed to cancel
some debts.
Linkages between economics and environment are often complex and caution
should be exercised when debt—damage relationships are recognized. Debt servicing
is not the only reason countries exploit resources: it might be to support urban
facilities, industrialization or special-interest groups.
Structural adjustment and the environment
Structural adjustment refers to strategies adopted as a response to debt. When recession
began to take hold in the developed countries, the World Bank and the International
Monetary Fund began to impose structural adjustment programmes to try to stabilize
the economies of debtor nations (developing countries), protect creditors and generally
shore up the international economy (Bello and Cunningham, 1994). The tool used to
try and stimulate growth and ensure debt repayment was the structural adjustment
loan—this was intended to counter the spiralling debt situation, fight various
inefficiencies, and improve the flow of traded goods. The World Bank began in Turkey
in 1980, and by 1990 another 64 countries had adopted measures. These measures
varied from country to country, although they usually took the form of loans to
reduce balance of payments problems, which were granted on condition the recipient
deregulated their economy, reduced state expenditure, and freed exchange rates. The
goal was to give priority to export earnings, make the economy more efficient by
86
ECONOMICS
cutting spending on wages and welfare, and reduce state controls to boost productive
sectors. There was limited success, but in some countries there were significant or
marked ill-effects: reduced household incomes, increased unemployment, inflation,
cut-back in support for welfare and public services, and less spending on
environmental management. Limited impacts have been felt in developed countries,
but in some poorer nations there has been significant increase in poverty, greater
childhood mortality (George, 1988), land abandonment, riots and rural—urban
migration. One of the consequences of structural adjustment that may have an impact
on the environment is the progressive disempowerment of the poor (Redclift, 1995).
At its worst structural adjustment has obliged many people to sacrifice environmental
assets for short-term survival.
At first these conditional loans gave little consideration to environmental
impacts. Since the mid-1990s there has been interest in the effects of structural
adjustment policies on the environment (Reed, 1992a; 1992b; 1996; World Bank,
1994). The World Bank and some other agencies involved in formulating structural
adjustment policies increasingly try to support better environmental management
and seek sustainable development.
Paying for conservation
The value of conservation in economic terms is considerable, but not adequately
realized. An assessment in the late 1970s suggested the contribution of plant and
animal species to the USA economy was roughly 4.5 per cent of GDP (in the region
of US$ 87,000 million) (McNeely et al., 1990:18). If the value were better known,
conservation might be given better funding. Provided it is compatible with
conservation, forest extraction, tourism and sport may generate supporting funds.
Eco-tourism has attracted particular attention as a means of funding conservation
(see chapter 10). So far, there has been little progress with taxing biotechnology or
pharmaceutical industries to support conservation, yet both draw upon biodiversity.
However, ways have been found of trading off debt for conservation or other forms
of environmental care.
There have been promising developments since the 1980s of debt-for-nature
swaps (Thomas Lovejoy has been credited with their invention in 1984). These have
been negotiated in a number of countries, and are widely seen to provide a way for
the recipient to pay off some or all foreign debt with less loss of face than would be
caused by defaulting. The debtor country avoids defaulting and still retains control
over conservation or environmental activities, and USA banks should be able to
write off some of the expense against taxes (Simons, 1988; Pearce, 1989; 1995:35,
47–48; Cartwright, 1989:124; McNeely, 1989; Shiva et al., 1991:63). Opponents,
especially in the recipient countries and on the staff of NGOs, are less supportive
(Hayter, 1989: 258; Sarkar and Ebbs, 1992). The earliest debt swaps were negotiated
in Ecuador and Bolivia by 1987, and subsequently in Costa Rica, the Philippines,
the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Malagasy, Jamaica, Cameroon, and other countries
(George, 1988: 168; Patterson, 1990; Yearley, 1991:182; 258).
87
CHAPTER FIVE
Debt-swaps take a variety of forms, but most involve conversion of hard
currency debt to local currency debt. When a lender realizes it will probably never
recoup, it sells the debt, at a discount, to another (donor) who then releases cash to
the debtor country in local currency, so the donation goes further to support
environmental management or conservation. Some debt-swaps are bond-based (a
central bank pays interest on a bond created, usually for an NGO, over a period
typically of five to seven years); others are government policy programmes (under
which the recipient government pledges to implement a policy or initiatives aimed at
improving the environment or conservation). Debt-debt swaps are the interchange
of foreign loans between creditors. Debt-rescue swaps (‘buybacks’) are the repurchase
of a country’s debt in secondary markets. Sometimes linked to debt-for-nature swaps
are carbon sequestration deals, whereby a developed country or corporation
establishes tree plantations to lock up carbon dioxide to compensate for their emissions
elsewhere.
Criticisms levelled at debt-for-nature swaps are that:
♦ they offer limited potential to pay off existing debts (i.e. are tiny compared
with typical national indebtedness);
♦ they may be used to ‘smear’ indigenous environmental groups efforts, i.e.
opponents of environmental protection spread rumours of foreign interference
to divert attention from other issues;
♦ there may be difficulties in adopting them in some countries because of different
accounting and regulatory systems;
♦ there is no guarantee of ongoing protection or care;
♦ they may be seen as an erosion of a developing country’s sovereignty;
♦ if operated through NGOs, swaps may not assist or train local agencies;
♦ they do little to change commercial forces that damage the environment;
♦ they have so far been applied to a limited range of activities, mainly park and
reserve establishment and maintenance;
♦ the main beneficiaries, it has been argued, were the debt-seller banks (Mahony,
1992).
Trade and environmental management
Trade impacts upon environment for example, it affects:
♦ rates of deforestation;
♦ demand for animal and plant products, and may be a major reason why a species
is endangered;
♦ global carbon dioxide levels;
♦ extraction of mineral resources, production of food and commodity crops;
♦ levels of pollution in developed countries;
♦ pollution controls in developing countries.
88
ECONOMICS
Some forms of trade can be less damaging than others: export of forest products
should be less damaging than logging, and may discourage deforestation if it is
carefully controlled and local people benefit (Buckley, 1993). To combat logging
the Body Shop store chain has tried to encourage environmentally benign forest
product trade by minimizing middleman profits. However, such products may have
limited markets, which restricts what can be achieved. Falling commodity prices on
the world market mean farmers get poor returns on crops, yet, committed to purchasing
inputs, they are forced to expand the area farmed, or intensify production, or practise
shifting cultivation and the extraction of other resources to supplement their farming
activities, leading to environmental degradation. The problem cannot be solved by
going back to a pre-cashcrop economy. Through trade, countries can obtain materials
and continue to expand production. It can also mean that production impacts (pollution
due to manufacture and problems associated with consumption of goods) are felt
over a wider area.
Trade and the environment
In the early 1990s probably over 80 per cent of the world trade was in the hands
of MNCs and TNCs (Anon, 1993:220). In 1974 the Group of 77 (G77)—a
coalition of 100, mainly developing, countries—demanded a New International
Economic Order (NIEO) at the UN General Assembly. The NIEO included plans
for new commodity agreements, alteration of what were seen as unfair patents
laws and general North—South economic reform, especially expanded free trade
as a way of creating employment and wealth. These demands have received
considerable support, and TNCs and MNCs can benefit from better access to
world markets. Some are less keen, and advocate a new protectionism, i.e. a
reduction in the volume of trade, as an alternative to free trade, to cure the market
problems that led to demands for NIEO but have not had much success (Lang
and Hines, 1993).
The main vehicle for reform has been the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade (GATT) (Morris, 1990; Shrybman, 1990; Davidson et al., 1992:174). There
are other multilateral trade agreements, e.g. the North American Free Trade Agreement
(NAFTA) (between the USA, Canada and Mexico in late 1993) (Ritchie, 1992); the
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) (founded in 1989 as a loose grouping
of 15 nations); the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), which seeks to promote
production and effective use of agricultural resources to maintain food supplies and
give EC farmers a fair standard of living. The CAP uses price supports and has had
significant effects on the environment of Europe and other countries which trade
with Europe.
The GATT, which became the World Trade Organization (WTO) in 1994, is a
multilateral agreement covering roughly 90 per cent of the world’s trade, first drafted
in 1947 to establish rules for the conduct of international trade, the hope being to
lower tariff barriers erected in the 1930s that were held to be a hindrance to world
development. There were eight rounds of meetings to discuss GATT prior to
89
CHAPTER FIVE
BOX 5.2 The positive and negative effects of free trade on
environmental management
Free trade might help environmental management through:
♦ ending tariff barriers that raise produce prices, causing farmers to overstress
land for profit;
♦ reducing the dumping of cheap US and European food surpluses, which, by
making it difficult for developing country producers to get a fair price,
discourage them from leaving land fallow or investing in land improvement,
erosion control, etc.;
♦ removing restrictions that make it difficult for developing countries to produce
and sell finished wood products to developing countries. This should give
much better profits and reduce logging;
♦ harmonizing standards and co-ordinating trade impacts on the environment
on a global scale;
Free trade might harm environmental management because:
♦ much existing or proposed environmental legislation could be interpreted
as illegal non-tariff trade barriers. There is thus a reduction in controls
which discouraged logging, trade in endangered species, use of cattle
growth hormones like BST, etc.;
♦ trade liberalization may lead to increased specialization of production that
may over-stress a resource or environment;
♦ the struggle to keep down costs to be competitive may mean exports are
expanded to compensate and resources or the environment are put under
stress;
♦ reduced import restrictions will remove opportunities to counter trade in
hardwoods, endangered species, etc. (see Box 5.3);
♦ there may be increased opportunities to sell commodities like beef, sugar,
etc., and this might encourage increased forest clearance and poor land
management in countries that are keen to boost production;
♦ producers may think twice about spending money on pollution control or
other forms of environmental management if another country does not, and
they are competing with it to sell similar goods, on otherwise equal terms
(Ritchie, 1992);
♦ it may be less easy, without the threat of trade restrictions, to get countries
to reduce carbon dioxide emissions or other pollution;
♦ poor countries may reduce domestic food prices, import grain, and raise
more export crops like soya (e.g. as happened in Brazil);
♦ any domestic support for the peasantry in developing countries or
poorer farmers in developed countries could be interpreted as unfair
protection. Small farmers might become marginalized and then damage
the land trying to survive;
90
ECONOMICS
♦ larger farmers, encouraged by free trade to practise industrial (agrochemical-
using) agriculture to produce export crops, may damage the land;
♦ there is a risk that foreign inputs and MNC controls will increase, leading to
more dependency;
♦ if free trade leads to reduced home production there is a risk of problems if
overseas supplies fail;
♦ it could be difficult to pass and enforce national environment and resource
management or health protection laws.
1985–1986, the last, the Uruguay Round, should have run from 1986 to 1990 but
failed to reach agreement until some years later (Raghavan, 1990; Anon., 1992). Things
had stalled over cutting subsidies to agriculture: in particular the French farming lobby
was opposed to the 1992 Blair House Agreements to reduce farm subsidies. In 1993 in
Tokyo the Quad Group of GATT (Japan, USA, Canada and the EC) agreed to abolish
or reduce many tariffs, effectively agreeing new world trade rules.
Free trade can lead to environmental damage: when the Roman Empire adopted
it grain prices seem to have fallen, prompting large landowners with many slaves to
practise more ruthless commercial farming, while smaller agriculturalists were forced
out of business. Richard Cobden was aware of the environmental implications for
the UK of freeing up trade by the repeal of the Corn Laws (1846) (legislation which
had protected farmers from falling wheat prices)—with free trade landowners drained
and cleared more land and intensified land use.
While free trade may bring some benefits, then, there are worries that it causes
environmental problems (Boxes 5.2 and 5.3). Difficulties outlined in Box 5.3 continue,
e.g. in April 1998 the WTO were still in disagreement with the USA over restricting
imports of shrimps caught with nets that endanger wildlife (The Times 28 April 1998).
The main problem is that signatory countries have less control over imports because
most quotas and controls are outlawed (Bown, 1990; Westlund, 1994). There are also
worries that free trade could favour developed countries’ biotechnology (Raghavan,
1990; Acharya, 1991).
GATT established a Disputes Panel to resolve problems but so far it has not
been effective enough at dealing with environmental issues. Interest in further greening
free trade has resulted in a growing literature (Sorsa, 1992; Esty, 1994; Marsh, 1994;
Rugman and Kirton, 1998). GATT set up a group on Environmental Means and
International Trade, and bodies like the OECD are keen to harmonize free trade and
environment (De Miraman and Stevens, 1992; Zarsky, 1994). It would also be wise
to seek greater co-ordination between the various free trade organizations and the
UN Commission on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).
In 1985 the 85 signatories of GATT undertook to try to restrict the export
of hazardous materials. However, pollution control activities are not easy because
of difficulties in disseminating information on pesticides and other compounds
and their effects, and because monitoring and enforcing controls in the real world
are often problematic. Measures were taken to improve controls; for example, in
1986 the FAO issued an International Code of Conduct on the Distribution and
91
CHAPTER FIVE
BOX 5.3 Clash between free trade and environmental management:
the yellow-fin tuna case
From 1972 the USA had restrictions on its own tuna fishing. Between 1988
and 1991 conflict arose because America felt the Mexicans were using purse-
sein netting techniques that killed marine mammals and other wildlife. In 1992
the USA enacted the International Dolphin Conservation Act, which prohibited
the import of fish or fish products from countries which were deemed to have
inadequate measures for protecting marine mammals.
The 1992 Act led the USA to place an embargo on imports of Mexican
canned yellow-fin tuna. Mexico complained (before the Act was passed) in
1991 that it would violate free trade rules. GATT found in favour of Mexico
(the ban being a violation of its Article XI) (Anderson and Blackhurst, 1992;
Charnovitz, 1993; Musgrave, 1993).
Similar problems have been caused by the USA’s (1987) Driftnet
Enforcement Act and (1992) Wild Bird Conservation Act. Problems with the
former are continuing at the time of writing. The difficulty is deciding whether
this sort of restriction is justified under free trade rules.
Use of Pesticides, and by 1990 about 100 countries were signatories. The FAO and
WHO set up the Codex Alimentarius Commission to establish food standards,
including acceptable pesticide levels, and this annually publishes standards. Under
GATT the Codex seems likely to have increased powers. However, it has been argued
that Codex decisions are determined too much by developed countries and MNCs or
TNCs (Avery et al., 1993). Any nation that already has, or is setting standards higher
than the Codex may well be deemed to be putting up trade barriers and could suffer
sanctions (for a recent study of WTO agreements and the environment, focusing on
how to solve the difficulties, see Cameron and Fijalkowski, 1998).
Recommended reading
Journals which publish articles on environmental management and economics
Ecological Economics
Environmental Economics
Environmental & Resource Economics
Local Environment
Natural Resource and Environmental Economics
New Economics
92
Chapter 6
Environmental risk
management, impact,
hazard and risk
assessment
♦ Environmental risk management 94
♦ Environmental impact assessment 95
♦ Social impact assessment 104
♦ Strategic environmental assessment 107
♦ Assessing the potential for development and
impacts of development: approaches other
than EIA and SIA 108
♦ Predicting future scenarios 112
♦ Hazard and risk assessment 113
♦ Technology assessment, hazard, risk and
impact assessment 116
♦ Computers and expert systems 117
♦ Adaptive environmental assessment
and adaptive environmental assessment and
management 118
♦ Integrated impact assessment, comprehensive
impact assessment, regional impact
assessment, integrated environmental
management, strategic environmental
assessment and related approaches 119
♦ Dealing with cumulative impacts 124
♦ Recommended reading 125
93
‘Ecology is the science which warns people who won’t listen, about ways they won’t
follow, to save an environment they don’t appreciate’ (Anon).
This chapter examines approaches used to forecast future scenarios, assess the
impacts caused by development, and the risks and hazards posed by nature and human
activity. These approaches are often linked with the assessment of economic impacts,
notably by CBA (see chapter 5), and often feed into eco-auditing (see chapter 4). For
those seeking greater depth of coverage, the following books in the Routledge
Environmental Management Series are recommended:
A.Nixon and O.Harrop (1998) Environmental Impact Assessment
S.McGill (1999) Environmental Risk Management
Environmental risk management
Environmental risk management incorporates a range of approaches (including risk
assessment, discussed later in this chapter) to:
♦ estimate risk;
♦ evaluate risk;
♦ respond to risk.
It deals with multidimensional risks (often involving interrelated physical and social
impacts) and demands political judgement to improve the chances of optimum decision
making (O’Riordan, 1979; Pollard et al., 1995). There have been calls for these
approaches to become more holistic (Harvey et al., 1995), and some already overlap
with or are combined together in eco-auditing. There is growing interest in risks
associated with global environmental change, including: biospheric catastrophe
(unstoppable shift to conditions that threaten human and other life); climatic perturbation
(natural or human-induced which threatens the well-being of people and wildlife);
reduced provision of basic needs (threats to sustained production of food, access to
adequate water, energy, etc.); and pollution (O’Riordan and Rayner, 1991).
Environmental risk management and most of the approaches discussed in this
chapter are imprecise, partly because the world is complex; a common cliché is that
‘everything in the environment is connected to everything else’. The media often
refer to the ‘butterfly effect’ (a concept from chaos theory, implying that a trivial
event can lead to a vast cascade of changes that are impossible to predict accurately).
Since the 1960s there has been a shift towards more appropriate development, and
the right to damage the environment and people in the name of ‘progress’ is
questioned. There is increased awareness that technology and biotechnology can
pose threats and there is growing interest in sustainable development. This chapter
94
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT, HAZARD AND RISK MANAGEMENT
looks at the approaches developed to identify and avoid problems or missed
opportunities. In addition to warning of impacts, risks and hazards, some of these
approaches can help make planning and management more accountable to the public,
and may encourage more careful decision making. They are often not the quantitative
scientific approaches they seem; rather, they are ordered but subjective methods for
improving judgement (Fairweather, 1993:10).
Environmental impact assessment
There is no universal definition of what exactly environmental impact assessment
(EIA) is, so it is best treated as a generic term for a process which seeks to blend
administration, planning, analysis and public involvement in pre-decision assessment.
A shorter explanation might be ‘an approach which seeks to improve development
by a priori assessment’ (Boxes 6.1 and 6.2). Figure 6.1 illustrates how EIA fits into
planning, Figures 6.2 and 6.3 show how it relates to other approaches.
Identifying consequences of a proposed activity is common sense, rather than
a revolutionary idea. However, for much of history it has not been the planning and
management approach adopted. Impact assessment has been evolving for over a
quarter-century, but it is still imperfect and is often misapplied or misused. The field
has been dominated by EIA; however, there are a number of approaches running
parallel (and sometimes overlapping), with broadly similar goals, frequently
exchanging information, techniques and methods, which are of value for
environmental management. These include social impact assessment (SIA) (see later
this chapter), hazard assessment, risk assessment, technology impact assessment,
eco-auditing, CBA, and a range of forecasting or futures scenario-prediction methods
(Ryecroft et al., 1988). These approaches have a lot in common: for example, there
is usually an effects focus; they are systematic, focused, interdisciplinary and
comprehensive, and generally iterative.
EIA can offer much more than simply a common-sense approach to
development: it can be a policy instrument, a planning tool, a means of public
involvement and part of a framework crucial to environmental management and the
drive for sustainable development. Some view impact assessment as a philosophy
rather than just a technique; Graham Smith (1993:12) argued that it should be treated
as ‘a bridge that integrates the science of environmental analysis with the policies of
resource management’.
Attitudes towards EIA vary from the view that it is just a required rubber-
stamping activity, or that it determines optimal development, to the idea that it has a
vital role to play in improving environmental management and planning to achieve
sustainable development (Lawrence, 1997).
Until recently planners and managers mainly asked:
♦ Is it technically feasible?
♦ Is it financially viable?
♦ Is it legally permissible?
95
CHAPTER SIX
BOX 6.1 An overview of EIA
The following observations describe EIA:
♦ It is proactive assessment, and should be initiated pre-project/programme/
policy, before development decisions are made. In-project/programme/policy
and post-project/programme/policy assessment are common. While these
may not allow much problem avoidance, they can advise on problem
mitigation, gather data, feed into future impact assessment, improve damage
control and the exploitation of unexpected benefits.
♦ It is systematic evaluation of all significant environmental (including social
and economic) consequences an action is likely to have upon the environment.
♦ It is a process leading to a statement to guide decision makers.
♦ It is a structured, systematic, comprehensive approach.
♦ It is a learning process and means to find the optimum development path.
♦ It is a process by which information is collected and assessed to determine
whether it is wise to proceed with a proposed development.
♦ It is an activity designed to identify and predict the impacts of an action on
the biogeophysical environment and on human health and well-being, and
to interpret and communicate information about such impacts.
♦ It is a process which forces (or should force) developers to reconsider
proposals.
♦ It is a process which has the potential to increase developers’ accountability
to the public.
♦ It usually involves initial screening and scoping (to determine what is to be
subjected to EIA, and decide what form the assessment should take).
♦ It should be subject to independent, objective review of results.
♦ It should publish a clear statement of identified impacts with an indication
of their significance (especially if any are irreversible).
♦ It should include a declaration of possible alternative development options,
including nil-development, and their likely impacts.
♦ Ideally there should be public participation in EIA (often it is partial or
avoided).
♦ There should be effective integration of EIA into the planning/legal process.
Source: Part-based on Barrow, 1997: Box 1.1, p. 3
96
ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT, HAZARD AND RISK MANAGEMENT
BOX 6.2 The figure below illustrates the typical stepwise EIA process.
Note the idealized steps or phases 0 to 6.
Source: redrawn from various sources by the author
continued . . .
97
